AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA Bill No. 122 of 2023 THE BHARATIYA NAGARIK SURAKSHA SANHITA, 2023 —————— ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES —————— CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY CLAUSES 1. Short title, extent and commencement. 2. Definitions. 3. Construction of references. 4. Trial of offences under Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita and other laws. 5. Saving. CHAPTER II CONSTITUTION OF CRIMINAL COURTS AND OFFICES 6. Classes of Criminal Courts. 7. Territorial divisions. 8. Court of Session. 9. Courts of Judicial Magistrates. 10. Chief Judicial Magistrate and Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, etc. 11. Special Judicial Magistrates. 12. Local jurisdiction of Judicial Magistrates. 13. Subordination of Judicial Magistrates. 14. Executive Magistrates. 15. Special Executive Magistrates. 16. Local Jurisdiction of Executive Magistrates. 17. Subordination of Executive Magistrates. 18. Public Prosecutors. 19. Assistant Public Prosecutors. 20. Directorate of Prosecution. CHAPTER III POWER OF COURTS 21. Courts by which offences are triable. 22. Sentences which High Courts and Sessions Judges may pass. 23. Sentences which Magistrates may pass. 24. Sentence of imprisonment in default of fine. (ii) CLAUSES 25. Sentence in cases of conviction of several offences at one trial. 26. Mode of conferring powers. 27. Powers of officers appointed. 28. Withdrawal of powers. 29. Powers of Judges and Magistrates exercisable by their successors-in-office. CHAPTER IV POWERS OF SUPERIOR OFFICERS OF POLICE AND AID TO THE MAGISTRATES AND THE POLICE 30. Powers of superior officers of police. 31. Public when to assist Magistrates and police. 32. Aid to person, other than police officer, executing warrant. 33. Public to give information of certain offences. 34. Duty of officers employed in connection with the affairs of a village to make certain report. CHAPTER V ARREST OF PERSONS 35. When policemay arrest without warrant. 36. Procedure of arrest and duties of officer making arrest. 37. Designated Police Officer. 38. Right of arrested person to meet an advocate of his choice during interrogation. 39. Arrest on refusal to give name and residence. 40. Arrest by private person and procedure on such arrest. 41. Arrest by Magistrate. 42. Protection of members of the Armed Forces from arrest. 43. Arrest how made. 44. Search of place entered by person sought to be arrested. 45. Pursuit of offenders into other jurisdictions. 46. No unnecessary restraint. 47. Person arrested to be informed of grounds of arrest and of right to bail. 48. Obligation of person making arrest to inform about the arrest, etc., to relative or friend. 49. Search of arrested person. 50. Power to seize offensive weapons. 51. Examination of accused by medical practitioner at the request of police officer. 52. Examination of person accused of rape by medical practitioner. 53. Examination of arrested person by medical officer. 54. Identification of person arrested. 55. Procedure when police officer deputes subordinate to arrest without warrant. 56. Health and safety of arrested person. (iii) CLAUSES 57. Person arrested to be taken before Magistrate or officer in charge of police station. 58. Person arrested not to be detained more than twenty-four hours. 59. Police to report apprehensions. 60. Discharge of person apprehended. 61. Power, on escape, to pursue and retake. 62. Arrest to be made strictly according to the Sanhita. CHAPTER VI PROCESSES TO COMPEL APPEARANCE A.—Summons 63. Form of summons. 64. Summons how served. 65. Service of summons on corporate bodies, firms, and societies. 66. Service when persons summoned cannot be found. 67. Procedure when service cannot be effected as before provided. 68. Service on Government servant. 69. Service of summons outside local limits. 70. Proof of service in such cases and when serving officer not present. 71. Service of summons on witness by post. B.—Warrant of arrest 72. Form of warrant of arrest and duration. 73. Power to direct security to be taken. 74. Warrants to whom directed. 75. Warrant may be directed to any person. 76. Warrant directed to police officer. 77. Notification of substance of warrant. 78. Where warrant may be executed. 79. Where warrant may be executed. 80. Warrant forwarded for execution outside jurisdiction. 81. Warrant directed to police officer for execution outside jurisdiction. 82. Procedure on arrest of person against whom warrant issued. 83. Procedure by Magistrate before whom such person arrested is brought. C.—Proclamation and attachment 84. Proclamation for person absconding. 85. Attachment of property of person absconding. 86. Identification and attachment of property of proclaimed person. 87. Claims and objections to attachment. 88. Release, sale and restoration of attached property. 89. Appeal from order rejecting application for restoration of attached property. (iv) CLAUSES D.—Other rules regarding processes 90. Issue of warrant in lieu of, or in addition to, summons. 91. Power to take bond for appearance. 92. Arrest on breach of bond for appearance. 93. Provisions of this Chapter generally applicable to summonses and warrants of arrest. CHAPTER VII PROCESS TO COMPEL THE PRODUCTION OF THINGS A.—Summons to produce 94. Summons to produce document or other thing. 95. Procedure as to letters and telegrams. B.—Search-warrants 96. When search-warrant may be issued. 97. Search of place suspected to contain stolen property, forged documents, etc. 98. Power to declare certain publications forfeited and to issue search-warrants for the same. 99. Application to High Court to set aside declaration of forfeiture. 100. Search for persons wrongfully confined. 101. Power to compel restoration of abducted females. 102. Direction, etc., of search-warrants. 103. Persons in charge of closed place to allow search. 104. Disposal of things found in search beyond jurisdiction. C.—Miscellaneous 105. Recording of search and seizure through audio-video electronic means. 106. Power of police officer to seize certain property. 107. Attachment, forfeiture or restoration of property. 108. Magistrate may direct search in his presence. 109. Power to impound document, etc., produced. 110. Reciprocal arrangements regarding processes. CHAPTER VIII RECIPROCAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR ASSISTANCE IN CERTAIN MATTERS AND PROCEDURE FOR ATTACHMENT AND FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY 111. Definitions. 112. Letter of request to competent authority for investigation in a country or place outside India. 113. Letter of request from a country or place outside India to a Court or an authority for investigation in India. 114. Assistance in securing transfer of persons. 115. Assistance in relation to orders of attachment or forfeiture of property. 116. Identifying unlawfully acquired property. 117. Seizure or attachment of property. (v) CLAUSES 118. Management of properties seized or forfeited under this Chapter. 119. Notice of forfeiture of property. 120. Forfeiture of property in certain cases. 121. Fine in lieu of forfeiture. 122. Certain transfers to be null and void. 123. Procedure in respect of letter of request. 124. Application of this Chapter. CHAPTER IX SECURITY FOR KEEPING THE PEACE AND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR 125. Security for keeping the peace on conviction. 126. Security for keeping the peace in other cases. 127. Security for good behaviour from persons disseminating seditious matters. 128. Security for good behaviour from suspected persons. 129. Security for good behaviour from habitual offenders. 130. Order to be made. 131. Procedure in respect of person present in Court. 132. Summons or warrant in case of person not so present. 133. Copy of order to accompany summons or warrant. 134. Power to dispense with personal attendance. 135. Inquiry as to truth of information. 136. Order to give security. 137. Discharge of person informed against. 138. Commencement of period for which security is required. 139. Contents of bond. 140. Power to reject sureties. 141. Imprisonment in default of security. 142. Power to release persons imprisoned for failing to give security. 143. Security for unexpired period of bond. CHAPTER X ORDER FOR MAINTENANCE OF WIVES, CHILDREN AND PARENTS 144. Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents. 145. Procedure. 146. Alteration in allowance. 147. Enforcement of order of maintenance. CHAPTER XI MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND TRANQUILLITY A.—Unlawful assemblies 148. Dispersal of assembly by use of civil force. 149. Use of armed forces to disperse assembly. (vi) CLAUSES 150. Power of certain armed force officers to disperse assembly. 151. Protection against prosecution for acts done under sections 148, 149 and 150. B.—Public nuisances 152. Conditional order for removal of nuisance. 153. Service or notification of order. 154. Person to whom order is addressed to obey or show cause. 155. Consequences of his failing to do so. 156. Procedure where existence of public right is denied. 157. Procedure where he appears to show cause. 158. Power of Magistrate to direct local investigation and examination of an expert. 159. Power of Magistrate to furnish written instructions, etc. 160. Procedure on order being made absolute and consequences of disobedience. 161. Injunction pending inquiry. 162. Magistrate may prohibit repetition or continuance of public nuisance. C.—Urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger 163. Power to issue order in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger. D.—Disputes as to immovable property 164. Procedure where dispute concerning land or water is likely to cause breach of peace. 165. Power to attach subject of dispute and to appoint receiver. 166. Dispute concerning right of use of land or water. 167. Local inquiry. CHAPTER XII PREVENTIVE ACTION OF THE POLICE 168. Police to prevent cognizable offences. 169. Information of design to commit cognizable offences. 170. Arrest to prevent the commission of cognizable offences. 171. Prevention of injury to public property. 172. Persons bound to conform to lawful directions of police. CHAPTER XIII INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO INVESTIGATE 173. Information in cognizable cases. 174. Information as to non-cognizable cases and investigation of such cases. 175. Police officer's power to investigate cognizable case. 176. Procedure for investigation. 177. Report how submitted. 178. Power to hold investigation or preliminary inquiry. 179. Police officer's power to require attendance of witnesses. 180. Examination of witnesses by police. 181. Statements to police not to be signed: Use of statements in evidence. 182. No inducement to be offered. (vii) CLAUSES 183. Recording of confessions and statements. 184. Medical examination of the victim of rape. 185. Search by police officer. 186. When officer in charge of police station may require another to issue search-warrant. 187. Procedure when investigation cannot be completed in twenty-four hours. 188. Report of investigation by subordinate police officer. 189. Release of accused when evidence deficient. 190. Cases to be sent to Magistrate, when evidence is sufficient. 191. Complainant and witnesses not to be required to accompany police officer and not to be subjected to restraint. 192. Diary of proceedings in investigation. 193. Report of police officer on completion of investigation. 194. Police to enquire and report on suicide, etc. 195. Power to summon persons. 196. Inquiry by Magistrate into cause of death. CHAPTER XIV JURISDICTION OF THE CRIMINAL COURTS IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS 197. Ordinary place of inquiry and trial. 198. Place of inquiry or trial. 199. Offence triable where act is done or consequence ensues. 200. Place of trial where act is an offence by reason of relation to other offence. 201. Place of trial in case of certain offences. 202. Offences committed by means of electronic communications, letters, etc. 203. Offence committed on journey or voyage. 204. Place of trial for offences triable together. 205. Power to order cases to be tried in different sessions divisions. 206. High Court to decide, in case of doubt, district where inquiry or trial shall take place. 207. Power to issue summons or warrant for offence committed beyond local jurisdiction. 208. Offence committed outside India. 209. Receipt of evidence relating to offences committed outside India. CHAPTER XV CONDITIONS REQUISITE FOR INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS 210. Cognizance of offences by Magistrates. 211. Transfer on application of the accused. 212. Making over of cases to Magistrates. 213. Cognizance of offences by Courts of Session. 214. Additional Sessions Judges to try cases made over to them. 215. Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of public servants, for offences against public justice and for offences relating to documents given in evidence. 216. Procedure for witnesses in case of threatening, etc. (viii) CLAUSES 217. Prosecution for offences against the State and for criminal conspiracy to commit such offence. 218. Prosecution of Judges and public servants. 219. Prosecution for offences against marriage. 220. Prosecution of offences under section 498A of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 221. Cognizance of offence. 222. Prosecution for defamation. CHAPTER XVI COMPLAINTS TO MAGISTRATES 223. Examination of complainant. 224. Procedure by Magistrate not competent to take cognizance of the case. 225. Postponement of issue of process. 226. Dismissal of complaint. CHAPTER XVII COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE MAGISTRATES 227. Issue of process. 228. Magistrate may dispense with personal attendance of accused. 229. Special summons in cases of petty offence. 230. Supply to the accused of copy of police report and other documents. 231. Supply of copies of statements and documents to accused in other cases triable by Court of Session. 232. Commitment of case to Court of Session when offence is triable exclusively by it. 233. Procedure to be followed when there is a complaint case and police investigation in respect of the same offence. CHAPTER XIVIII THE CHARGE A.—Form of charges 234. Contents of charge. 235. Particulars as to time, place and person. 236. When manner of committing offence must be stated. 237. Words in charge taken in sense of law under which offence is punishable. 238. Effect of errors. 239. Court may alter charge. 240. Recall of witnesses when charge altered. 241. Separate charges for distinct offences. 242. Offences of same kind within year may be charged together. 243. Trial for more than one offence. 244. Where it is doubtful what offence has been committed. (ix) CLAUSES 245. When offence proved included in offence charged. 246. What persons may be charged jointly. 247. Withdrawal of remaining charges on conviction on one of several charges. CHAPTER XIX TRIAL BEFORE A COURT OF SESSION 248. Trial to be conducted by Public Prosecutor. 249. Opening case for prosecution. 250. Discharge. 251. Framing of charge. 252. Conviction on plea of guilty. 253. Date for prosecution evidence. 254. Evidence for prosecution. 255. Acquittal. 256. Entering upon defence. 257. Arguments. 258. Judgment of acquittal or conviction. 259. Previous conviction. 260. Procedure in cases instituted under section 223(1). CHAPTER XX TRIAL OF WARRANT-CASES BY MAGISTRATES A.—Cases instituted on a police report 261. Compliance with section 231. 262. When accused shall be discharged. 263. Framing of charge. 264. Conviction on plea of guilty. 265. Evidence for prosecution. 266. Evidence for defence. B.—Cases instituted otherwise than on police report 267. Evidence for prosecution. 268. When accused shall be discharged. 269. Procedure where accused is not discharged. 270. Evidence for defence. C.-Conclusion of trial 271. Acquittal or conviction. 272. Absence of complainant. 273. Compensation for accusation without reasonable cause. (x) CLAUSES CHAPTER XXI TRIAL OF SUMMONS-CASES BY MAGISTRATES 274. Substance of accusation to be stated. 275. Conviction on plea of guilty. 276. Conviction on plea of guilty in absence of accused in petty cases. 277. Procedure when not convicted. 278. Acquittal or conviction. 279. Non-appearance or death of complainant. 280. Withdrawal of complaint. 281. Power to stop proceedings in certain cases. 282. Power of Court to convert summons-cases into warrant-cases. CHAPTER XXII SUMMARY TRIALS 283. Power to try summarily. 284. Summary trial by Magistrate of the second class. 285. Procedure for summary trials. 286. Record in summary trials. 287. Judgment in cases tried summarily. 288. Language of record and judgment. CHAPTER XXIII PLEA BARGAINING 289. Application of the Chapter. 290. Application for plea bargaining. 291. Guidelines for mutually satisfactory disposition. 292. Report of the mutually satisfactory disposition to be submitted before the Court. 293. Disposal of the case. 294. Judgment of the Court. 295. Finality of the judgment. 296. Power of the Court in plea bargaining. 297. Period of detention undergone by the accused to be set off against the sentence of imprisonment. 298. Savings. 299. Statements of accused not to be used. 300. Non-application of the Chapter. CHAPTER XXIV ATTENDANCE OF PERSONS CONFINED OR DETAINED IN PRISONS 301. Definitions. 302. Power to require attendance of prisoners. 303. Power of State Government or Central Government to exclude certain persons from operation of section 302. 304. Officer in charge of prison to abstain from carrying out order in certain contingencies. (xi) CLAUSES 305. Prisoner to be brought to Court in custody. 306. Power to issue commission for examination of witness in prison. CHAPTER XXV EVIDENCE IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS A.—Mode of taking and recording evidence 307. Language of Courts. 308. Evidence to be taken in presence of accused. 309. Record in summons-cases and inquiries. 310. Record in warrant-cases. 311. Record in trial before Court of Session. 312. Language of record of evidence. 313. Procedure in regard to such evidence when completed. 314. Interpretation of evidence to accused or his pleader. 315. Remarks respecting demeanour of witness. 316. Record of examination of accused. 317. Interpreter to be bound to interpret truthfully. 318. Record in High Court. B.-Commissions for the examination of witnesses 319. When attendance of witness may be dispensed with and commission issued. 320. Commission to whom to be issued. 321. Execution of commissions. 322. Parties may examine witnesses. 323. Return of commission. 324. Adjournment of proceeding. 325. Execution of foreign commissions. 326. Deposition of medical witness. 327. Identification report of Magistrate. 328. Evidence of officers of the Mint. 329. Reports of certain Government scientific experts. 330. No formal proof of certain documents. 331. Affidavit in proof of conduct of public servants. 332. Evidence of formal character on affidavit. 333. Authorities before whom affidavits may be sworn. 334. Previous conviction or acquittal how proved. 335. Record of evidence in absence of accused. 336. Evidence of public servants, experts, police officers in certain cases. 337. Person once convicted or acquitted not to be tried for same offence. CHAPTER XXVI GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO INQUIRIES AND TRIALS 338. Appearance by Public Prosecutors. (xii) CLAUSES 339. Permission to conduct prosecution. 340. Right of person against whom proceedings are instituted to be defended. 341. Legal aid to accused at State expense in certain cases. 342. Procedure when corporation or registered society is an accused. 343. Tender of pardon to accomplice. 344. Power to direct tender of pardon. 345. Trial of person not complying with conditions of pardon. 346. Power to postpone or adjourn proceedings. 347. Local inspection. 348. Power to summon material witness, or examine person present. 349. Power of Magistrate to order person to give specimen signatures or handwriting. 350. Expenses of complainants and witnesses. 351. Power to examine the accused. 352. Oral arguments and memorandum of arguments. 353. Accused person to be competent witness. 354. No influence to be used to induce disclosure. 355. Provision for inquiries and trial being held in the absence of accused in certain cases. 356. Inquiry, trial or judgment in absentia of proclaimed offender. 357. Procedure where accused does not understand proceedings. 358. Power to proceed against other persons appearing to be guilty of offence. 359. Compounding of offences. 360. Withdrawal from prosecution. 361. Procedure in cases which Magistrate cannot dispose of. 362. Procedure when, after commencement of inquiry or trial, Magistrate finds case should be committed. 363. Trial of persons previously convicted of offences against coinage, stamp-law or property. 364. Procedure when Magistrate cannot pass sentence sufficiently severe. 365. Conviction or commitment on evidence partly recorded by one Magistrate and partly by another. 366. Court to be open. CHAPTER XXVII PROVISIONS AS TO ACCUSED PERSONS WITH MENTAL ILLNESS 367. Procedure in case of accused being person with mental illness. 368. Procedure in case of person with mental illness tried before Court. 369. Release of person with mental illness pending investigation or trial. 370. Resumption of inquiry or trial. 371. Procedure on accused appearing before Magistrate or Court. 372. When accused appears to have been of sound mind. 373. Judgment of acquittal on ground of mental illness. (xiii) CLAUSES 374. Person acquitted on such ground to be detained in safe custody. 375. Power of State Government to empower officer-in-charge to discharge. 376. Procedure where prisoner with mental illness is reported capable of making his defence. 377. Procedure where person with mental illness detained is declared fit to be released. 378. Delivery of person with mental liabilities to care of relative or friend. CHAPTER XXVIII PROVISIONS AS TO OFFENCES AFFECTING THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 379. Procedure in cases mentioned in section 215. 380. Appeal. 381. Power to order costs. 382. Procedure of Magistrate taking cognizance. 383. Summary procedure for trial for giving false evidence. 384. Procedure in certain cases of contempt. 385. Procedure where Court considers that case should not be dealt with under section 384. 386. When Registrar or Sub-Registrar to be deemed a Civil Court. 387. Discharge of offender on submission of apology. 388. Imprisonment or committal of person refusing to answer or produce document. 389. Summary procedure for punishment for non-attendance by a witness in obedience to summons. 390. Appeals from convictions under sections 383, 384, 388 and 389. 391. Certain Judges and Magistrates not to try certain offences when committed before themselves. 392. Judgment. 393. Language and contents of judgment. 394. Order for notifying address of previously convicted offender. 395. Order to pay compensation. 396. Victim compensation scheme. 397. Treatment of victims. 398. Witness protection scheme. 399. Compensation to persons groundlessly arrested. 400. Order to pay costs in non-cognizable cases. 401. Order to release on probation of good conduct or after admonition. 402. Special reasons to be recorded in certain cases. 403. Court not to alter judgment. 404. Copy of judgment to be given to the accused and other persons. 405. Judgment when to be translated. 406. Court of Session to send copy of finding and sentence to District Magistrate. (xiv) CLAUSES CHAPTER XXIX SUBMISSION OF DEATH SENTENCES FOR CONFIRMATION 407. Sentence of death to be submitted by Court of Session for confirmation. 408. Power to direct further inquiry to be made or additional evidence to be taken. 409. Power of High Court to confirm sentence or annul conviction. 410. Confirmation or new sentence to be signed by two Judges. 411. Procedure in case of difference of opinion. 412. Procedure in cases submitted to High Court for confirmation. CHAPTER XXX APPEALS 413. No appeal to lie unless otherwise provided. 414. Appeal from orders requiring security or refusal to accept or rejecting surety for keeping peace or good behaviour. 415. Appeals from convictions. 416. No appeal in certain cases when accused pleads guilty. 417. No appeal in petty cases. 418. Appeal by the State Government against sentence. 419. Appeal in case of acquittal. 420. Appeal against conviction by High Court in certain cases. 421. Special right of appeal in certain cases. 422. Appeal to Court of Session how heard. 423. Petition of appeal. 424. Procedure when appellant in jail. 425. Summary dismissal of appeal. 426. Procedure for hearing appeals not dismissed summarily. 427. Powers of the Appellate Court. 428. Judgments of Subordinate Appellate Court. 429. Order of High Court on appeal to be certified to lower Court. 430. Suspension of sentence pending the appeal; release of appellant on bail. 431. Arrest of accused in appeal from acquittal. 432. Appellate Court may take further evidence or direct it to be taken. 433. Procedure where Judges of Court of Appeal are equally divided. 434. Finality of judgments and orders on appeal. 435. Abatement of appeals. CHAPTER XXXI REFERENCE AND REVISION 436. Reference to High Court. 437. Disposal of case according to decision of High Court. 438. Calling for records to exercise powers of revision. (xv) CLAUSES 439. Power to order inquiry. 440. Sessions Judge's powers of revision. 441. Power of Additional Sessions Judge. 442. High Court's powers of revision. 443. Power of High Court to withdraw or transfer revision cases. 444. Option of Court to hear parties. 445. Statement by Magistrate of grounds of his decision to be considered by High Court. 446. High Court's order to be certified to lower Court. CHAPTER XXXII TRANSFER OF CRIMINAL CASES 447. Power of Supreme Court to transfer cases and appeals. 448. Power of High Court to transfer cases and appeals. 449. Power of Sessions Judge to transfer cases and appeals. 450. Withdrawal of cases and appeals by Session Judge. 451. Withdrawal of cases by Judicial Magistrate. 452. Making over or withdrawal of cases by Executive Magistrates. 453. Reasons to be recorded. CHAPTER XXXIII EXECUTION, SUSPENSION, REMISSION AND COMMUTATION OF SENTENCES A.—Death Sentences 454. Execution of order passed under section 410. 455. Execution of sentence of death passed by High Court. 456. Postponement of execution of sentence of death in case of appeal to Supreme Court. 457. Postponement of capital sentence on pregnant woman. B.—Imprisonment 458. Power to appoint place of imprisonment. 459. Execution of sentence of imprisonment. 460. Direction of warrant for execution. 461. Warrant with whom to be lodged. C.—Levy of fine 462. Warrant for levy of fine. 463. Effect of such warrant. 464. Warrant for levy of fine issued by a Court in any territory to which this Sanhita does not extend. 465. Suspension of execution of sentence of imprisonment. D.—General provisions regarding execution 466. Who may issue warrant. 467. Sentence on escaped convict when to take effect. 468. Sentence on offender already sentenced for another offence. (xvi) CLAUSES 469. Period of detention undergone by the accused to be set off against the sentence of imprisonment. 470. Saving. 471. Return of warrant on execution of sentence. 472. Money ordered to be paid recoverable as a fine. 473. Mercy Petition in death sentence cases. 474. Power to suspend or remit sentences. 475. Power to commute sentence. 476. Restriction on powers of remission or commutation in certain cases. 477. Concurrent power of Central Government in case of death sentences. 478. State Government to act after concurrence with Central Government in certain cases. CHAPTER XXXIV PROVISIONS AS TO BAIL AND BONDS 479. Bail and bond. 480. In what cases bail to be taken. 481. Maximum period for which an undertrial prisoner can be detained. 482. When bail may be taken in case of non-bailable offence. 483. Bail to require accused to appear before next appellate Court. 484. Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest. 485. Special powers of High Court or Court of Session regarding bail. 486. Amount of bond and reduction thereof. 487. Bond of accused and sureties. 488. Declaration by sureties. 489. Discharge from custody. 490. Power to order sufficient bail when that first taken is insufficient. 491. Discharge of sureties. 492. Deposit instead of recognizance. 493. Procedure when bond has been forfeited. 494. Cancellation of bond and bail bond. 495. Procedure in case of insolvency of death of surety or when a bond is forfeited. 496. Bond required from minor. 497. Appeal from orders under section 446. 498. Power to direct levy of amount due on certain recognizances. CHAPTER XXXV DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY 499. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial in certain cases. 500. Order for disposal of property at conclusion of trial. 501. Payment to innocent purchaser of money found on accused. 502. Appeal against orders under section 500 or section 501. 503. Destruction of libellous and other matter. (xvii) CLAUSES 504. Power to restore possession of immovable property. 505. Procedure by police upon seizure of property. 506. Procedure where no claimant appears within six months. 507. Power to sell perishable property. CHAPTER XXXVI IRREGULAR PROCEEDINGS 508. Irregularities which do not vitiate proceedings. 509. Irregularities which vitiate proceedings. 510. Proceedings in wrong place. 511. Non-compliance with provisions of section 183 or section 316. 512. Effect of omission to frame, or absence of, or error in, charge. 513. Finding or sentence when reversible by reason of error, omission or irregularity. 514. Defect or error not to make attachment unlawful. CHAPTER XXXVII LIMITATION FOR TAKING COGNIZANCE OF CERTAIN OFFENCES 515. Definitions. 516. Bar to taking cognizance after lapse of the period of limitation. 517. Commencement of the period of limitation. 518. Exclusion of time in certain cases. 519. Exclusion of date on which Court is closed. 520. Continuing offence. 521. Extension of period of limitation in certain cases. CHAPTER XXXVIII MISCELLANEOUS 522. Trials before High Courts. 523. Delivery to commanding officers of persons liable to be tried by Court-martial. 524. Forms. 525. Power of High Court to make rules. 526. Power to alter functions allocated to Executive Magistrate in certain cases. 527. Case in which Judge or Magistrate is personally interested. 528. Practicing advocate not to sit as Magistrate in certain Courts. 529. Public servant concerned in sale not to purchase or bid for property. 530. Saving of inherent powers of High Court. 531. Duty of High Court to exercise continuous superintendence over Courts. 532. Trial and proceedings to be held in electronic mode. 533. Repeal and savings. THE FIRST SCHEDULE. THE SECOND SCHEDULE. AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA Bill No. 122 of 2023 THE BHARATIYA NAGARIK SURAKSHA SANHITA, 2023 A BILL to consolidate and amend the law relating to Criminal Procedure. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY 5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. Short title, extent and (2) The provisions of this Sanhita, other than those relating to Chapters IX, XI and commencement. XII thereof, shall not apply— (a) to the State of Nagaland; (b) to the tribal areas, 10 but the concerned State Government may, by notification, apply such provisions or any of them to the whole or part of the State of Nagaland or such tribal areas, as the case may be, with such supplemental, incidental or consequential modifications, as may be specified in the notification. Explanation.—In this section, "tribal areas" means the territories which immediately before the 21st day of January, 1972, were included in the tribal areas of Assam, as referred to in paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, other than those within the local limits of the municipality of Shillong. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 5 in the Official Gazette, appoint. Definitions. 2. (1) In this Sanhita, unless the context otherwise requires,— (a) "audio-video electronic" means shall include use of any communication device for the purposes of video conferencing, recording of processes of identification, search and seizure or evidence, transmission of electronic communication and for 10 such other purposes and by such other means as the State Government may, by rules provide;"; (b) "bailable offence" means an offence which is shown as bailable in the First Schedule, or which is made bailable by any other law for the time being in force; and "non-bailable offence" means any other offence; (c) "charge" includes any head of charge when the charge contains more heads than one; (d) "cognizable offence" means an offence for which, and "cognizable case" means a case in which, a police officer may, in accordance with the First Schedule or under any other law for the time being in force, arrest without warrant; 20 (e) "complaint" means any allegation made orally or in writing to a Magistrate, with a view to his taking action under this Sanhita, that some person, whether known or unknown, has committed an offence, but does not include a police report. Explanation.—A report made by a police officer in a case which discloses, after investigation, the commission of a non-cognizable offence shall be deemed to be 25 a complaint; and the police officer by whom such report is made shall be deemed to be the complainant; (f) "electronic communication" means the communication of any written, verbal, pictorial information or video content transmitted (whether from one person to another, from one device to another or from a person to a device or from a device to a person) 30 by means of an electronic device including but not limited to—a telephone, a mobile or cellular phone, or other wireless telecommunication device, or a computer, or audio-video players and cameras or any other electronic device or electronic form as may be specified by notification, by the Central Government. (g) "High Court" means,— 35 (i) in relation to any State, the High Court for that State; (ii) in relation to a Union territory to which the jurisdiction of the High Court for a State has been extended by law, that High Court; (iii) in relation to any other Union territory, the highest Court of criminal appeal for that territory other than the Supreme Court of India; 40 (h) "India" means the territories to which this Sanhita extends; (i) "inquiry" means every inquiry, other than a trial, conducted under this Sanhita by a Magistrate or Court; (j) "investigation" includes all the proceedings under this Sanhita for the collection of evidence conducted by a police officer or by any person (other than a 45 Magistrate) who is authorised by a Magistrate in this behalf. Explanation.—Where any of the provisions of a special Act are inconsistent with the provisions of this Sanhita, the provisions of the special Act shall prevail. (k) "judicial proceeding" includes any proceeding in the course of which evidence is or may be legally taken on oath; (l) "local jurisdiction", in relation to a Court or Magistrate, means the local area within which the Court or Magistrate may exercise all or any of its or his powers under 5 this Sanhita and such local area may comprise the whole of the State, or any part of the State, as the State Government may, by notification, specify; (m) "non-cognizable offence" means an offence for which, and "non-cognizable case" means a case in which, a police officer has no authority to arrest without warrant; 10 (n) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette; (o) "offence" means any act or omission made punishable by any law for the time being in force and includes any act in respect of which a complaint may be made 1 of 1871. under section 20 of the Cattle Trespass Act, 1871; (p) "officer in charge of a police station" includes, when the officer in charge of 15 the police station is absent from the station-house or unable from illness or other cause to perform his duties, the police officer present at the station-house who is next in rank to such officer and is above the rank of constable or, when the State Government so directs, any other police officer so present; (q) "place" includes a house, building, tent, vehicle and vessel; 20 (r) "pleader", when used with reference to any proceeding in any Court, means an advocate or a person authorised by or under any law for the time being in force, to practise in such Court, and includes any other person appointed with the permission of the Court to act in such proceeding; (s) "police report" means a report forwarded by a police officer to a Magistrate 25 under sub-section (1) of section 176; (t) "police station" means any post or place declared generally or specially by the State Government, to be a police station, and includes any local area specified by the State Government in this behalf; (u) "Public Prosecutor" means any person appointed under section 18, and 30 includes any person acting under the directions of a Public Prosecutor; (v) "sub-division" means a sub-division of a district; (w) "summons-case" means a case relating to an offence, and not being a warrant-case; (x) "victim" means a person who has suffered any loss or injury caused by 35 reason of the act or omission for which the accused person has been charged and includes the guardian or legal heir of such victim; (y) "warrant-case" means a case relating to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding two years; (2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Bharatiya 2 of 2000. 40 Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and Information Technology Act, 2000 have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act and Sanhita; 3. (1) Unless the context otherwise requires, any reference in any existing law, to a Construction Magistrate, Magistrate of the first class or a Magistrate of the second class shall, in relation of references. to any area, be construed as a reference to a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Judicial 45 Magistrate of the second class, as the case may be, exercising jurisdiction in such area. (2) Where, under any law, other than this Sanhita, the functions exercisable by a Magistrate relate to matters,— (a) which involve the appreciation or shifting of evidence or the formulation of any decision which exposes any person to any punishment or penalty or detention in custody pending investigation, inquiry or trial or would have the effect of sending 5 him for trial before any Court, they shall, subject to the provisions of this Sanhita, be exercisable by a Judicial Magistrate; or (b) which are administrative or executive in nature, such as, the granting of a licence, the suspension or cancellation of a licence, sanctioning a prosecution or withdrawing from a prosecution, they shall, subject to the provisions of clause (a) be 10 exercisable by an Executive Magistrate. Trial of 4. (1) All offences under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 shall be investigated, offences under inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with according to the provisions hereinafter Bharatiya contained. Nyaya Sanhita and other laws. (2) All offences under any other law shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and 15 otherwise dealt with according to the same provisions, but subject to any enactment for the time being in force regulating the manner or place of investigating, inquiring into, trying or otherwise dealing with such offences. Saving. 5. Nothing contained in this Sanhita shall, in the absence of a specific provision to the contrary, affect any special or local law for the time being in force, or any special 20 jurisdiction or power conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by any other law for the time being in force. CHAPTER II CONSTITUTION OF CRIMINAL COURTS AND OFFICES Classes of 6. Besides the High Courts and the Courts constituted under any law, other than this 25 Criminal Sanhita, there shall be, in every State, the following classes of Criminal Courts, namely:— Courts. (i) Courts of Session; (ii) Judicial Magistrates of the first class; (iii) Judicial Magistrates of the second class; and (iv) Executive Magistrates. 30 Territorial 7. (1) Every State shall be a sessions division or shall consist of sessions divisions; divisions. and every sessions divisions shall, for the purposes of this Sanhita, be a district or consist of districts. (2) The State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, alter the limits or the number of such divisions and districts. 35 (3) The State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, divide any district into sub-divisions and may alter the limits or the number of such sub-divisions. (4) The sessions divisions, districts and sub-divisions existing in a State at the commencement of this Sanhita, shall be deemed to have been formed under this section. Court of 8. (1) The State Government shall establish a Court of Session for every sessions 40 Session. division. (2) Every Court of Session shall be presided over by a Judge, to be appointed by the High Court. (3) The High Court may also appoint Additional Sessions Judges to exercise jurisdiction in a Court of Session. 45 (4) The Sessions Judge of one sessions division may be appointed by the High Court to be also an Additional Sessions Judge of another division, and in such case, he may sit for the disposal of cases at such place or places in the other division as the High Court may direct. 5 (5) Where the office of the Sessions Judge is vacant, the High Court may make arrangements for the disposal of any urgent application which is, or may be, made or pending before such Court of Session by an Additional Sessions Judge or if there be no Additional Sessions Judge, by a Chief Judicial Magistrate, in the sessions division; and every such Judge or Magistrate shall have jurisdiction to deal with any such application. 10 (6) The Court of Session shall ordinarily hold its sitting at such place or places as the High Court may, by notification, specify; but, if, in any particular case, the Court of Session is of opinion that it will tend to the general convenience of the parties and witnesses to hold its sittings at any other place in the sessions division, it may, with the consent of the prosecution and the accused, sit at that place for the disposal of the case or the examination 15 of any witness or witnesses therein. (7) The Sessions Judge may, from time to time, make orders consistent with this Sanhita, as to the distribution of business among such Additional Sessions Judges. (8) The Sessions Judge may also make provision for the disposal of any urgent application, in the event of his absence or inability to act, by an Additional Sessions Judge 20 or if there be no Additional Sessions Judge, by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and such Judge or Magistrate shall be deemed to have jurisdiction to deal with any such application. Explanation.—For the purposes of this Sanhita, "appointment" does not include the first appointment, posting or promotion of a person by the Government to any Service, or post in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State, where under any law, such 25 appointment, posting or promotion is required to be made by the Government. 9. (1) In every district there shall be established as many Courts of Judicial Magistrates Courts of of the first class and of the second class, and at such places, as the State Government may, Judicial Magistrates. after consultation with the High Court, by notification, specify: Provided that the State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, 30 establish, for any local area, one or more Special Courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first class or of the second class to try any particular case or particular class of cases, and where any such Special Court is established, no other Court of Magistrate in the local area shall have jurisdiction to try any case or class of cases for the trial of which such Special Court of Judicial Magistrate has been established. 35 (2) The presiding officers of such Courts shall be appointed by the High Court. (3) The High Court may, whenever it appears to it to be expedient or necessary, confer the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or of the second class on any member of the Judicial Service of the State, functioning as a Judge in a Civil Court. 10. (1) In every district, the High Court shall appoint a Judicial Magistrate of the first Chief Judicial 40 class to be the Chief Judicial Magistrate. Magistrate and Additional (2) The High Court may appoint any Judicial Magistrate of the first class to be an Chief Judicial Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, and such Magistrate shall have all or any of the Magistrate, etc. powers of a Chief Judicial Magistrate under this Sanhita or under any other law for the time being in force as the High Court may direct. 45 (3) The High Court may designate any Judicial Magistrate of the first class in any sub-division as the Sub-divisional Judicial Magistrate and relieve him of the responsibilities specified in this section as occasion requires. (4) Subject to the general control of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, every Sub-divisional Judicial Magistrate shall also have and exercise, such powers of supervision and control 50 over the work of the Judicial Magistrates (other than Additional Chief Judicial Magistrates) in the sub-division as the High Court may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf. Special Judicial 11. (1) The High Court may, if requested by the Central or State Government so to do, Magistrates. confer upon any person who holds or has held any post under the Government, all or any of the powers conferred or conferrable by or under this Sanhita on a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or of the second class, in respect to particular cases or to particular classes of cases, in any local area: 5 Provided that no such power shall be conferred on a person unless he possesses such qualification or experience in relation to legal affairs as the High Court may, by rules, specify. (2) Such Magistrates shall be called Special Judicial Magistrates and shall be appointed for such term, not exceeding one year at a time, as the High Court may, by general or special 10 order, direct. Local 12. (1) Subject to the control of the High Court, the Chief Judicial Magistrate may, jurisdiction of from time to time, define the local limits of the areas within which the Magistrates appointed Judicial under section 9 or under section 11 may exercise all or any of the powers with which they Magistrates. may respectively be invested under this Sanhita: 15 Provided that the Court of Special Judicial Magistrate may hold its sitting at any place within the local area for which it is established. (2) Except as otherwise provided by such definition, the jurisdiction and powers of every such Magistrate shall extend throughout the district. (3) Where the local jurisdiction of a Magistrate appointed under section 9 or section 11 20 extends to an area beyond the district in which he ordinarily holds Court, any reference in this Sanhita to the Court of Session or Chief Judicial Magistrate shall, in relation to such Magistrate, throughout the area within his local jurisdiction, be construed, unless the context otherwise requires, as a reference to the Court of Session or Chief Judicial Magistrate, as the case may be, exercising jurisdiction in relation to the said district. 25 13. (1) Every Chief Judicial Magistrate shall be subordinate to the Sessions Judge; Subordination of Judicial and every other Judicial Magistrate shall, subject to the general control of the Sessions Magistrates. Judge, be subordinate to the Chief Judicial Magistrate. (2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may, from time to time, make rules or give special orders, consistent with this Sanhita, as to the distribution of business among the Judicial 30 Magistrates subordinate to him. Executive 14. (1) In every district, the State Government may appoint as many persons as it Magistrates. thinks fit to be Executive Magistrates and shall appoint one of them to be the District Magistrate. (2) The State Government may appoint any Executive Magistrate to be an Additional 35 District Magistrate, and such Magistrate shall have such of the powers of a District Magistrate under this Sanhita or under any other law for the time being in force as may be directed by the State Government. (3) Whenever, in consequence of the office of a District Magistrate becoming vacant, any officer succeeds temporarily to the executive administration of the district, such officer 40 shall, pending the orders of the State Government, exercise all the powers and perform all the duties respectively conferred and imposed by this Sanhita on the District Magistrate. (4) The State Government may place an Executive Magistrate in charge of a sub-division and may relieve him of the charge as occasion requires; and the Magistrate so placed in charge of a sub-division shall be called the Sub-divisional Magistrate. 45 (5) The State Government may, by general or special order and subject to such control and directions as it may deem fit to impose, delegate its powers under sub-section (4) to the District Magistrate. (6) Nothing in this section shall preclude the State Government from conferring, under any law for the time being in force, on a Commissioner of Police all or any of the powers of an Executive Magistrate. 15. The State Government may appoint, for such term as it may think fit, Executive Special 5 Magistrates or any police officer not below the rank of Superintendent of Police or equivalent, Executive Magistrates. to be known as Special Executive Magistrates, for particular areas or for the performance of particular functions and confer on such Special Executive Magistrates such of the powers as are conferrable under this Sanhita on Executive Magistrates, as it may deem fit. 16. (1) Subject to the control of the State Government, the District Magistrate may, Local 10 from time to time, define the local limits of the areas within which the Executive Magistrates Jurisdiction of Executive may exercise all or any of the powers with which they may be invested under this Sanhita. Magistrates. (2) Except as otherwise provided by such definition, the jurisdiction and powers of every such Magistrate shall extend throughout the district. 17. (1) All Executive Magistrates shall be subordinate to the District Magistrate, and Subordination 15 every Executive Magistrate (other than the Sub-divisional Magistrate) exercising powers in of Executive Magistrates. a sub-division shall also be subordinate to the Sub-divisional Magistrate, subject, however, to the general control of the District Magistrate. (2) The District Magistrate may, from time to time, make rules or give special orders, consistent with this Sanhita, as to the distribution or allocation of business among the 20 Executive Magistrates subordinate to him. 18. (1) For every High Court, the Central Government or the State Government shall, Public after consultation with the High Court, appoint a Public Prosecutor and may also appoint Prosecutors. one or more Additional Public Prosecutors, for conducting in such Court, any prosecution, appeal or other proceeding on behalf of the Central Government or the State Government, 25 as the case may be: Provided that for National Capital Territory of Delhi, the Central Government shall, after consultation with the High Court of Delhi, appoint the Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutors for the purposes of this sub-section. (2) The Central Government may appoint one or more Public Prosecutors for the 30 purpose of conducting any case in any district or local area. (3) For every district, the State Government shall appoint a Public Prosecutor and may also appoint one or more Additional Public Prosecutors for the district: Provided that the Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor appointed for one district may be appointed also to be a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public 35 Prosecutor, as the case may be, for another district. (4) The District Magistrate shall, in consultation with the Sessions Judge, prepare a panel of names of persons, who are, in his opinion fit to be appointed as Public Prosecutors or Additional Public Prosecutors for the district. (5) No person shall be appointed by the State Government as the Public Prosecutor or 40 Additional Public Prosecutor for the district unless his name appears in the panel of names prepared by the District Magistrate under sub-section (4). (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where in a State there exists a regular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers, the State Government shall appoint a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor only from among the persons constituting such Cadre: Provided that where, in the opinion of the State Government, no suitable person is available in such Cadre for such appointment, that Government may appoint a person as Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor, as the case may be, from the panel of names prepared by the District Magistrate under sub-section (4). Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,— (a) "regular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers" means a Cadre of Prosecuting Officers which includes therein the post of Public Prosecutor, by whatever name called, and which provides for promotion of Assistant Public Prosecutors, by whatever name called, to that post; 5 (b) "Prosecuting Officer" means a person, by whatever name called, appointed to perform the functions of Public Prosecutor, Special Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor under this Sanhita. (7) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or sub-section (6), 10 only if he has been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years. (8) The Central Government or the State Government may appoint, for the purposes of any case or class of cases, a person who has been in practice as an advocate for not less than ten years as a Special Public Prosecutor: Provided that the Court may permit the victim to engage an advocate of his choice to 15 assist the prosecution under this sub-section. (9) For the purposes of sub-section (7) and sub-section (8), the period during which a person has been in practice as a pleader, or has rendered (whether before or after the commencement of this Sanhita) service as a Public Prosecutor or as an Additional Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor or other Prosecuting Officer, by whatever name called, shall be deemed to be the period during which such person has been in practice as an advocate. Assistant 19. (1) The State Government shall appoint in every district one or more Assistant Public Public Prosecutors for conducting prosecutions in the Courts of Magistrates. Prosecutors. (2) The Central Government may appoint one or more Assistant Public Prosecutors 25 for the purpose of conducting any case in the Courts of Magistrates. (3) Without prejudice to provisions contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), where no Assistant Public Prosecutor is available for the purposes of any particular case, the District Magistrate may appoint any other person to be the Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of that case after giving notice of fourteen days to the State Government: 30 Provided that no police officer shall be eligible to be appointed as an Assistant Public Prosecutor, if he— (a) has taken any part in the investigation into the offence with respect to which the accused is being prosecuted; or (b) is below the rank of Inspector. 35 Directorate of 20. (1) The State Government may establish,— Prosecution. (a) a Directorate of Prosecution in the State consisting of a Director of Prosecution and as many Deputy Directors of Prosecution as it think fit; and (b) District Directorate of Prosecution in every district consisting of as many Deputy Directors and Assistant Directors of Prosecution, as it thinks fit. 40 (2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed,— (a) as a Director of Prosecution or a Deputy Director of Prosecution, if he has been in practice as an advocate for not less than fifteen years or is or has been a Sessions Judge; (b) as an Assistant Director of Prosecution if he has been in practice as an 45 advocate for not less than seven years or has been a Magistrate of the first class. (3) The Directorate of Prosecution shall be headed by the Director of Prosecution, who shall function under the administrative control of the Home Department in the State. (4) Every Deputy Director of Prosecution or Assistant Director of Prosecution shall be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution; and every Assistant Director of Prosecution 5 shall be subordinate to the Deputy Director of Prosecution. (5) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor appointed by the State Government under sub-section (1), or sub-section (8), of section 18 to conduct cases in the High Court shall be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution. (6) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor 10 appointed by the State Government under sub-section (3), or as the case may be, sub-section (8), of section 18 to conduct cases in District Courts and every Assistant Public Prosecutor appointed under sub-section (1) of section 19 shall be subordinate to the Deputy Director of Prosecution or the Assistant Director of Prosecution. (7) The powers and functions of the Director of Prosecution shall be to monitor cases 15 in which offences are punishable for ten years or more, or with life imprisonment, or with death; to expedite the proceedings and to give opinion on filing of appeals. (8) The powers and functions of the Deputy Director of Prosecution shall be to examine and scrutinise police report and monitor the cases in which offences are punishable for seven years or more, but less than ten years, for ensuring their expeditious disposal. 20 (9) The functions of the Assistant Director of Prosecution shall be to monitor cases in which offences are punishable for less than seven years. (10) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (7), (8) and (9), the Director, Deputy Director or Assistant Director of Prosecution shall have the power to deal with and be responsible for all proceedings under this Sanhita. 25 (11) The other powers and functions of the Director of Prosecution and the Deputy Directors of Prosecution and the areas for which each of the Deputy Directors of Prosecution have been appointed shall be such as the State Government may, by notification, specify. (12) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Advocate General for the State while performing the functions of a Public Prosecutor. 30 CHAPTER III POWER OF COURTS 21. Subject to the other provisions of this Sanhita,— Courts by which (a) any offence under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 may be tried by— offences are triable. (i) the High Court; or 35 (ii) the Court of Session; or (iii) any other Court by which such offence is shown in the First Schedule to be triable: Provided that any offence under section 63, section 64, section 68, section 70 or section 71 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 shall be tried as far as practicable by 40 a Court presided over by a woman. (b) any offence under any other law shall, when any Court is mentioned in this behalf in such law, be tried by such Court and when no Court is so mentioned, may be tried by— (i) the High Court; or 45 (ii) any other Court by which such offence is shown in the First Schedule to be triable. Sentences 22. (1) A High Court may pass any sentence authorised by law. which High (2) A Sessions Judge or Additional Sessions Judge may pass any sentence authorised Courts and Sessions Judges by law; but any sentence of death passed by any such Judge shall be subject to confirmation may pass. by the High Court. Sentences 23. (1) The Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate may pass any sentence authorised by 5 which law except a sentence of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment for a term Magistrates exceeding seven years. may pass. (2) The Court of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class may pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, or of fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, or of both. 10 (3) The Court of Judicial Magistrate of the second class may pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or of fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees, or of both. Sentence of 24. (1) The Court of a Judicial Magistrate may award such term of imprisonment in imprisonment default of payment of fine as is authorised by law: 15 in default of fine. Provided that the term— (a) is not in excess of the powers of the Judicial Magistrate under section 23; (b) shall not, where imprisonment has been awarded as part of the substantive sentence, exceed one-fourth of the term of imprisonment which the Magistrate is competent to inflict as punishment for the offence otherwise than as imprisonment in 20 default of payment of the fine. (2) The imprisonment awarded under this section may be in addition to a substantive sentence of imprisonment for the maximum term awardable by the Magistrate under section 23. Sentence in 25. (1) When a person is convicted at one trial of two or more offences, the Court may, cases of subject to the provisions of section 9 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, sentence him 25 conviction of for such offences, to the several punishments prescribed therefor which such Court is several competent to inflict and the court shall, considering the gravity of offences, order such offences at one trial. punishments to run concurrently or consecutively. (2) In the case of consecutive sentences, it shall not be necessary for the Court by reason only of the aggregate punishment for the several offences being in excess of the 30 punishment which it is competent to inflict on conviction of a single offence, to send the offender for trial before a higher Court: Provided that— (a) in no case shall such person be sentenced to imprisonment for a longer period than fourteen years; 35 (b) the aggregate punishment shall not exceed twice the amount of punishment which the Court is competent to inflict for a single offence. (3) For the purpose of appeal by a convicted person, the aggregate of the consecutive sentences passed against him under this section shall be deemed to be a single sentence. Mode of 26. (1) In conferring powers under this Sanhita, the High Court or the State Government, 40 conferring as the case may be, may, by order, empower persons specially by name or in virtue of their powers. offices or classes of officials generally be their official titles. (2) Every such order shall take effect from the date on which it is communicated to the person so empowered. Powers of 27. Whenever any person holding an office in the service of Government who has 45 officers been invested by the High Court or the State Government with any powers under this appointed. Sanhita throughout any local area is appointed to an equal or higher office of the same nature, within a like local area under the same State Government, he shall, unless the High Court or the State Government, as the case may be, otherwise directs, or has otherwise directed, exercise the same powers in the local area in which he is so appointed. 28. (1) The High Court or the State Government, as the case may be, may withdraw all Withdrawal of 5 or any of the powers conferred by it under this Sanhita on any person or by any officer powers. subordinate to it. (2) Any powers conferred by the Chief Judicial Magistrate or by the District Magistrate may be withdrawn by the respective Magistrate by whom such powers were conferred. 29. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Sanhita, the powers and duties of a Powers of 10 Judge or Magistrate may be exercised or performed by his successor-in-office. Judges and Magistrates (2) When there is any doubt as to who is the successor-in-office, the Sessions Judge exercisable by shall determine by order in writing the Judge who shall, for the purposes of this Sanhita or their successors-in- of any proceedings or order thereunder, be deemed to be the successor-in-office. office. (3) When there is any doubt as to who is the successor-in-office of any Magistrate, 15 the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or the District Magistrate, as the case may be, shall determine by order in writing the Magistrate who shall, for the purpose of this Sanhita or of any proceedings or order thereunder, be deemed to be the successor-in-office of such Magistrate. CHAPTER IV POWERS OF SUPERIOR OFFICERS OF POLICE AND AID TO THE MAGISTRATES AND THE POLICE 20 30. Police officers superior in rank to an officer in charge of a police station may Powers of exercise the same powers, throughout the local area to which they are appointed, as may be superior officers of exercised by such officer within the limits of his station. police. 31. Every person is bound to assist a Magistrate or police officer reasonably demanding Public when to his aid— assist Magistrates 25 (a) in the taking or preventing the escape of any other person whom such and police. Magistrate or police officer is authorised to arrest; or (b) in the prevention or suppression of a breach of the peace; or (c) in the prevention of any injury attempted to be committed to any public property. 30 32. When a warrant is directed to a person other than a police officer, any other Aid to person, person may aid in the execution of such warrant, if the person to whom the warrant is other than directed be near at hand and acting in the execution of the warrant. police officer, executing warrant. 33. (1) Every person, aware of the commission of, or of the intention of any other Public to give person to commit, any offence punishable under any of the following sections of the information 35 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, namely:— of certain offences. (i) sections 145 to 152 and section 156; (ii) sections 187 and 189; (iii) sections 272 to 278; (iv) sections 101, 102 and 103; 40 (v) section 138; (vi) section 305; (vii) sections 307 to 311; (viii) section 314; (ix) sections 322 to 326; (x) section 330; (xi) section 329; and (xii) sections 176 to 180, shall, in the absence of any reasonable excuse, the burden of proving which excuse shall lie 5 upon the person so aware, forthwith give information to the nearest Magistrate or police officer of such commission or intention. (2) For the purposes of this section, the term "offence" includes any act committed at any place out of India which would constitute an offence if committed in India. Duty of 34. (1) Every officer employed in connection with the affairs of a village and every 10 officers person residing in a village shall forthwith communicate to the nearest Magistrate or to the employed in officer in charge of the nearest police station, whichever is nearer, any information which he connection may possess respecting— with the affairs of a village to (a) the permanent or temporary residence of any notorious receiver or vendor make certain report. of stolen property in or near such village; 15 (b) the resort to any place within, or the passage through, such village of any person whom he knows, or reasonably suspects, to be a thug, robber, escaped convict or proclaimed offender; (c) the commission of, or intention to commit, in or near such village any non-bailable offence or any offence punishable under section 187 and section 189 of 20 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; (d) the occurrence in or near such village of any sudden or unnatural death or of any death under suspicious circumstances or the discovery in or near such village of any corpse or part of a corpse, in circumstances which lead to a reasonable suspicion that such a death has occurred or the disappearance from such village of any person 25 in circumstances which lead to a reasonable suspicion that a non-bailable offence has been committed in respect of such person; (e) the commission of, or intention to commit, at any place out of India near such village any act which, if committed in India, would be an offence punishable under any of the following sections of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, namely, 30 176, 177 and 179 (both inclusive), 101, 103, 305, 307 to 311 (both inclusive), 330, 176, 177, 178 and 179; (f) any matter likely to affect the maintenance of order or the prevention of crime or the safety of person or property respecting which the District Magistrate, by general or special order made with the previous sanction of the State Government, 35 has directed him to communicate information. (2) In this section,— (i) "village" includes village-lands; (ii) the expression "proclaimed offender" includes any person proclaimed as an offender by any Court or authority in any territory in India to which this Sanhita does 40 not extend, in respect of any act which if committed in the territories to which this Sanhita extends, would be an offence punishable under any of the offence punishable with imprisonment for ten years or more or for imprisonment of life or with death under Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; (iii) the words "officer employed in connection with the affairs of the village" 45 means a member of the panchayat of the village and includes the headman and every officer or other person appointed to perform any function connected with the administration of the village. CHAPTER V ARREST OF PERSONS 35. (1) Any police officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a When police warrant, arrest any person— may arrest without 5 (a) who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a cognizable offence; warrant. (b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years or which may extend to seven years whether with or without fine, if the following 10 conditions are satisfied, namely:— (i) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of such complaint, information, or suspicion that such person has committed the said offence; (ii) the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary— (a) to prevent such person from committing any further offence; or 15 (b) for proper investigation of the offence; or (c) to prevent such person from causing the evidence of the offence to disappear or tampering with such evidence in any manner; or (d) to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to 20 dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to the police officer; or (e) as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the Court whenever required cannot be ensured, and the police officer shall record while making such arrest, his reasons in 25 writing: Provided that a police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not required under the provisions of this sub-section, record the reasons in writing for not making the arrest; (c) against whom credible information has been received that he has committed 30 a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to more than seven years whether with or without fine or with death sentence and the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of that information that such person has committed the said offence; (d) who has been proclaimed as an offender either under this Sanhita or by 35 order of the State Government; or (e) in whose possession anything is found which may reasonably be suspected to be stolen property and who may reasonably be suspected of having committed an offence with reference to such thing; or (f) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his duty, or who has 40 escaped, or attempts to escape, from lawful custody; or (g) who is reasonably suspected of being a deserter from any of the Armed Forces of the Union; or (h) who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion 45 exists, of his having been concerned in, any act committed at any place out of India which, if committed in India, would have been punishable as an offence, and for which he is, under any law relating to extradition, or otherwise, liable to be apprehended or detained in custody in India; or (i) who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any rule made under sub-section (5) of section 394; or (j) for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, has been received 5 from another police officer, provided that the requisition specifies the person to be arrested and the offence or other cause for which the arrest is to be made and it appears therefrom that the person might lawfully be arrested without a warrant by the officer who issued the requisition. (2) Subject to the provisions of section 39, no person concerned in a non-cognizable 10 offence or against whom a complaint has been made or credible information has been received or reasonable suspicion exists of his having so concerned, shall be arrested except under a warrant or order of a Magistrate. (3) The police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not required under sub-section (1) issue a notice directing the person against whom a reasonable 15 complaint has been made, or credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable offence, to appear before him or at such other place as may be specified in the notice. (4) Where such a notice is issued to any person, it shall be the duty of that person to comply with the terms of the notice. (5) Where such person complies and continues to comply with the notice, he shall not be arrested in respect of the offence referred to in the notice unless, for reasons to be recorded, the police officer is of the opinion that he ought to be arrested. (6) Where such person, at any time, fails to comply with the terms of the notice or is unwilling to identify himself, the police officer may, subject to such orders as may have 25 been passed by a competent Court in this behalf, arrest him for the offence mentioned in the notice. (7) No arrest shall be made without prior permission of the officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police in case of an offence which is punishable for less than three years and such person is infirm or is above sixty years of age. 30 Procedure of 36. Every police officer while making an arrest shall— arrest and (a) bear an accurate, visible and clear identification of his name which will duties of officer making facilitate easy identification; arrest. (b) prepare a memorandum of arrest which shall be— (i) attested by at least one witness, who is a member of the family of the 35 person arrested or a respectable member of the locality where the arrest is made; (ii) countersigned by the person arrested; and (c) inform the person arrested, unless the memorandum is attested by a member of his family, that he has a right to have a relative or a friend or any other person named by him to be informed of his arrest. Designated 37. The State Government shall— Police Officer. (a) establish a Police control room in every district and at State level; (b) designate a police officer in every district and in every police station, not below the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police who shall be responsible for 45 maintaining the information about the names and addresses of the persons arrested, nature of the offence with which charged, which shall be prominently displayed in any manner including in digital mode in every police station and at the district headquarters. 38. When any person is arrested and interrogated by the police, he shall be entitled Right of to meet an advocate of his choice during interrogation, though not throughout interrogation. arrested person to meet an advocate of his choice during interrogation. 39. (1) When any person who, in the presence of a police officer, has committed or Arrest on has been accused of committing a non-cognizable offence refuses on demand of such refusal to give 5 officer to give his name and residence or gives a name or residence which such officer has name and residence. reason to believe to be false, he may be arrested by such officer in order that his name or residence may be ascertained. (2) When the true name and residence of such person have been ascertained, he shall be released on his executing a bond, with or without sureties, to appear before a Judicial 10 Magistrate if so required: Provided that, if such person is not resident in India, the bond shall be secured by a surety or sureties resident in India. (3) Should If the true name and residence of such person not be ascertained within twenty-four hours from the time of arrest or if he fails to execute the bond, or, if so required, 15 to furnish sufficient sureties, he shall forthwith be forwarded to the nearest Magistrate having jurisdiction. 40. (1) Any private person may arrest or cause to be arrested any person who in his Arrest by presence commits a non-bailable and cognizable offence, or any proclaimed offender, and, private person without unnecessary delay, but within six hours from such arrest, shall make over or cause and procedure on such arrest. 20 to be made over any person so arrested to a police officer, or, in the absence of a police officer, take such person or cause him to be taken in custody to the nearest police station. (2) If there is reason to believe that such person comes under the provisions of section 35, a police officer shall take him in custody. (3) If there is reason to believe that he has committed a non-cognizable offence, and 25 he refuses on the demand of a police officer to give his name and residence, or gives a name or residence which such officer has reason to believe to be false, he shall be dealt with under the provisions of section 39; but if there is no sufficient reason to believe that he has committed any offence, he shall be at once released. 41. (1) When any offence is committed in the presence of a Magistrate, whether Arrest by 30 Executive or Judicial, within his local jurisdiction, he may himself arrest or order any person Magistrate. to arrest the offender, and may thereupon, subject to the provisions herein contained as to bail, commit the offender to custody. (2) Any Magistrate, whether Executive or Judicial, may at any time arrest or direct the arrest, in his presence, within his local jurisdiction, of any person for whose arrest he is 35 competent at the time and in the circumstances to issue a warrant. 42. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 39 to 41 (both inclusive), no Protection of member of the Armed Forces of the Union shall be arrested for anything done or purported members of the Armed to be done by him in the discharge of his official duties except after obtaining the consent Forces from of the Central Government. arrest. 40 (2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply to such class or category of the members of the Force charged with the maintenance of public order as may be specified therein, wherever they may be serving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub-section shall apply as if for the expression "Central Government" occurring therein, the expression "State Government" were 45 substituted. Arrest how 43. (1) In making an arrest the police officer or other person making the same shall made. actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission to the custody by word or action: Provided that where a woman is to be arrested, unless the circumstances indicate to the contrary, her submission to custody on an oral intimation of arrest shall be presumed and, unless the circumstances otherwise require or unless the police officer is a female, the police officer shall not touch the person of the woman for making her arrest, and give the information regarding such arrest and place where she is being held to any of her relatives, friends or such other persons as may be disclosed or mentioned by her for the purpose of giving such information. 10 (2) If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest him, or attempts to evade the arrest, such police officer or other person may use all means necessary to effect the arrest. (3) The police officer may, keeping in view the nature and gravity of the offence, use handcuff while effecting the arrest of a person who is a habitual, repeat offender who 15 escaped from custody, who has committed offence of organised crime, offence of terrorist act, drug related crime, or offence of illegal possession of arms and ammunition, murder, rape, acid attack, counterfeiting of coins and currency notes, human trafficking, sexual offences against children, offences against the State, including acts endangering sovereignty, unity and integrity of India or economic offences. 20 (4) Nothing in this section gives a right to cause the death of a person who is not accused of an offence punishable with death or with imprisonment for life. (5) Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be arrested after sunset and before sunrise, and where such exceptional circumstances exist, the woman police officer shall, by making a written report, obtain the prior permission of the Judicial Magistrate of 25 the first class within whose local jurisdiction the offence is committed or the arrest is to be made. Search of place 44. (1) If any person acting under warrant of arrest, or any police officer having entered by authority to arrest, has reason to believe that the person to be arrested has entered into, or person sought is within, any place, any person residing in, or being in charge of, such place shall, on 30 to be arrested. demand of such person acting as aforesaid or such police officer, allow him free ingress thereto, and afford all reasonable facilities for a search therein. (2) If ingress to such place cannot be obtained under sub-section (1), it shall be lawful in any case for a person acting under a warrant and in any case in which a warrant may issue, but cannot be obtained without affording the person to be arrested an opportunity of 35 escape, for a police officer to enter such place and search therein, and in order to effect an entrance into such place, to break open any outer or inner door or window of any house or place, whether that of the person to be arrested or of any other person, if after notification of his authority and purpose, and demand of admittance duly made, he cannot otherwise obtain admittance: 40 Provided that, if any such place is an apartment in the actual occupancy of a female (not being the persons to be arrested) who, according to custom, does not appear in public, such person or police officer shall, before entering such apartment, give notice to such female that she is at liberty to withdraw and shall afford her every reasonable facility for withdrawing, and may then break open the apartment and enter it. 45 (3) Any police officer or other person authorised to make an arrest may break open any outer or inner door or window of any house or place in order to liberate himself or any other person who, having lawfully entered for the purpose of making an arrest, is detained therein. 45. A police officer may, for the purpose of arresting without warrant any person Pursuit of whom he is authorised to arrest, pursue such person into any place in India. offenders into other jurisdictions. 46. The person arrested shall not be subjected to more restraint than is necessary to No unnecessary prevent his escape. restraint. 5 47. (1) Every police officer or other person arresting any person without warrant shall Person forthwith communicate to him full particulars of the offence for which he is arrested or other arrested to be informed of grounds for such arrest. grounds of (2) Where a police officer arrests without warrant any person other than a person arrest and of right to bail. accused of a non-bailable offence, he shall inform the person arrested that he is entitled to 10 be released on bail and that he may arrange for sureties on his behalf. 48. (1) Every police officer or other person making any arrest under this Sanhita shall Obligation of forthwith give the information regarding such arrest and place where the arrested person is person making arrest to being held to any of his relatives, friends or such other persons as may be disclosed or inform about mentioned by the arrested person for the purpose of giving such information and also to the arrest, etc., 15 the designated police officer in the district. to relative or friend. (2) The police officer shall inform the arrested person of his rights under sub-section (1) as soon as he is brought to the police station. (3) An entry of the fact as to who has been informed of the arrest of such person shall be made in a book to be kept in the police station in such form as the State Government may, 20 by rules, provide. (4) It shall be the duty of the Magistrate before whom such arrested person is produced, to satisfy himself that the requirements of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) have been complied with in respect of such arrested person. 49. (1) Whenever,— Search of arrested 25 (i) a person is arrested by a police officer under a warrant which does not person. provide for the taking of bail, or under a warrant which provides for the taking of bail but the person arrested cannot furnish bail, and (ii) a person is arrested without warrant, or by a private person under a warrant, and cannot legally be admitted to bail, or is unable to furnish bail, 30 the officer making the arrest or, when the arrest is made by a private person, the police officer to whom he makes over the person arrested, may search such person, and place in safe custody all articles, other than necessary wearing-apparel, found upon him and where any article is seized from the arrested person, a receipt showing the articles taken in possession by the police officer shall be given to such person. 35 (2) Whenever it is necessary to cause a female to be searched, the search shall be made by another female with strict regard to decency. 50. The police officer or other person making any arrest under this Sanhita may, Power to seize immediately after the arrest is made, take from the person arrested any offensive weapons offensive weapons. which he has about his person, and shall deliver all weapons so taken to the Court or officer 40 before which or whom the officer or person making the arrest is required by this Sanhita to produce the person arrested. 51. (1) When a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence of such a Examination nature and alleged to have been committed under such circumstances that there are of accused by medical reasonable grounds for believing that an examination of his person will afford evidence as practitioner at 45 to the commission of an offence, it shall be lawful for a registered medical practitioner, the request of acting at the request of any police officer, and for any person acting in good faith in his aid police officer. and under his direction, to make such an examination of the person arrested as is reasonably necessary in order to ascertain the facts which may afford such evidence, and to use such force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose. (2) Whenever the person of a female is to be examined under this section, the examination shall be made only by, or under the supervision of, a female registered medical practitioner. 5 (3) The registered medical practitioner shall, without any delay, forward the examination report to the investigating officer. Explanation.—In this section and in sections 52 and 53,— (a) "examination" shall include the examination of blood, blood stains, semen, swabs in case of sexual offences, sputum and sweat, hair samples and finger nail 10 clippings by the use of modern and scientific techniques including DNA profiling and such other tests which the registered medical practitioner thinks necessary in a particular case; (b) "registered medical practitioner" means a medical practitioner who possesses any medical qualification recognised under the National Medical Commission Act, 15 2019 and whose name has been entered in the National Medical Register or a State 30 of 2019. Medical Register under that Act. Examination 52. (1) When a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence of rape or an of person attempt to commit rape and there are reasonable grounds for believing that an examination accused of of his person will afford evidence as to the commission of such offence, it shall be lawful for 20 rape by a registered medical practitioner employed in a hospital run by the Government or by a local medical practitioner. authority and in the absence of such a practitioner within the radius of sixteen kilometers from the place where the offence has been committed, by any other registered medical practitioner, acting at the request of any police officer, and for any person acting in good faith in his aid and under his direction, to make such an examination of the arrested person 25 and to use such force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose. (2) The registered medical practitioner conducting such examination shall, without delay, examine such person and prepare a report of his examination giving the following particulars, namely:— (i) the name and address of the accused and of the person by whom he was 30 brought; (ii) the age of the accused; (iii) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the accused; (iv) the description of material taken from the person of the accused for DNA profiling; and 35 (v) other material particulars in reasonable detail. (3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at. (4) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall also be noted in the report. (5) The registered medical practitioner shall, without delay, forward the report to the 40 investigating officer, who shall forward it to the Magistrate referred to in section 193 as part of the documents referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (6) of that section. Examination 53. (1) When any person is arrested, he shall be examined by a medical officer in the of arrested service of the Central Government or a State Government, and in case the medical officer is person by not available, by a registered medical practitioner soon after the arrest is made: 45 medical officer. Provided that where the arrested person is a female, the examination of the body shall be made only by or under the supervision of a female medical officer, and in case the female medical officer is not available, by a female registered medical practitioner: Provided further that if the registered medical practitioner is of the opinion that one 5 more examination of such person is necessary, she may do so. (2) The medical officer or a registered medical practitioner so examining the arrested person shall prepare the record of such examination, mentioning therein any injuries or marks of violence upon the person arrested, and the approximate time when such injuries or marks may have been inflicted. 10 (3) Where an examination is made under sub-section (1), a copy of the report of such examination shall be furnished by the medical officer or registered medical practitioner, as the case may be, to the arrested person or the person nominated by such arrested person. 54. Where a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence and his Identification identification by any other person or persons is considered necessary for the purpose of of person arrested. 15 investigation of such offence, the Court, having jurisdiction may, on the request of the officer in charge of a police station, direct the person so arrested to subject himself to identification by any person or persons in such manner as the Court may deem fit: Provided that, if the person identifying the person arrested is mentally or physically disabled, such process of identification shall take place under the supervision of a Judicial 20 Magistrate who shall take appropriate steps to ensure that such person identifies the person arrested using methods that person is comfortable with and the identification process shall be recorded by any audio-video electronic means. 55. (1) When any officer in charge of a police station or any police officer making an Procedure investigation under Chapter XIII requires any officer subordinate to him to arrest without a when police officer deputes 25 warrant (otherwise than in his presence) any person who may lawfully be arrested without subordinate to a warrant, he shall deliver to the officer required to make the arrest an order in writing, arrest without specifying the person to be arrested and the offence or other cause for which the arrest is warrant. to be made and the officer so required shall, before making the arrest, notify to the person to be arrested the substance of the order and, if so required by such person, shall show him 30 the order. (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect the power of a police officer to arrest a person under section 35. 56. It shall be the duty of the person having the custody of an accused to take Health and reasonable care of the health and safety of the accused. safety of arrested person. 35 57. A police officer making an arrest without warrant shall, without unnecessary Person delay and subject to the provisions herein contained as to bail, take or send the person arrested to be taken before arrested before a Judicial Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, or before the officer in Magistrate or charge of a police station. officer in charge of police station. 58. No police officer shall detain in custody a person arrested without warrant for a Person 40 longer period than under all the circumstances of the case is reasonable, and such period arrested not to be detained shall not, in the absence of a special order of a Magistrate under section 187, exceed more than twenty-four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to twenty-four the Magistrate's Court, whether having jurisdiction or not. hours. 59. Officers in charge of police stations shall report to the District Magistrate, or, if Police to 45 he so directs, to the Sub-divisional Magistrate, the cases of all persons arrested without report apprehensions. warrant, within the limits of their respective stations, whether such persons have been admitted to bail or otherwise. Discharge of 60. No person who has been arrested by a police officer shall be discharged except person on his own bond, or on bail, or under the special order of a Magistrate. apprehended. Power, on 61. (1) If a person in lawful custody escapes or is rescued, the person from whose escape, to custody he escaped or was rescued may immediately pursue and arrest him in any place in pursue and India. 5 retake. (2) The provisions of section 44 shall apply to arrests under sub-section (1) although the person making any such arrest is not acting under a warrant and is not a police officer having authority to arrest. Arrest to be 62. No arrest shall be made except in accordance with the provisions of this Sanhita made strictly or any other law for the time being in force providing for arrest. 10 according to Sanhita. CHAPTER VI PROCESSES TO COMPEL APPEARANCE A.—Summons Form of 63. Every summons issued by a Court under this Sanhita shall be,— summons. (i) in writing, in duplicate, signed by the presiding officer of such Court or by 15 such other officer as the High Court may, from time to time, by rule direct, and shall bear the seal of the Court; or (ii) in an encrypted or any other form of electronic communication and shall bear the image of the seal of the Court. Summons how 64. (1) Every summons shall be served by a police officer, or subject to such rules as 20 served. the State Government may make in this behalf, by an officer of the Court issuing it or other public servant: Provided that the police station or the registrar in the Court shall maintain a register to enter the address, email address, phone number and such other details as State Government may, by rules, provide. 25 (2) The summons shall, if practicable, be served personally on the person summoned, by delivering or tendering to him one of the duplicates of the summons: Provided that summons bearing the image of Court's seal may also be served by electronic communication in such form and in such manner, as the State Government may, by rules, provide. 30 (3) Every person on whom a summons is so served personally shall, if so required by the serving officer, sign a receipt therefor on the back of the other duplicate. Service of 65. (1) Service of a summons on a company or corporation may be effected by serving summons on it on the Director, Manager, Secretary or other officer of the company or corporation, or by corporate letter sent by registered post addressed to the Director, Manager, Secretary or other officer 35 bodies, firms, of the company or corporation in India, in which case the service shall be deemed to have and societies. been effected when the letter would arrive in ordinary course of post. Explanation.—In this section, "company" means a body corporate and "corporation" means an incorporated company or other body corporate or a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. 40 21 of 1860. (2) Service of a summons on a firm or other association of individuals may be effected by serving it on any partner of such firm or association, or by letter sent by registered post addressed to such partner, in which case the service shall be deemed to have been effected when the letter would arrive in ordinary course of post. 66. Where the person summoned cannot, by the exercise of due diligence, be found, Service when the summons may be served by leaving one of the duplicates for him with some adult persons summoned member of his family residing with him, and the person with whom the summons is so left cannot be shall, if so required by the serving officer, sign a receipt therefor on the back of the other found. 5 duplicate. Explanation.—A servant is not a member of the family within the meaning of this section. 67. If service cannot by the exercise of due diligence be effected as provided in Procedure section 64, section 65 or section 66, the serving officer shall affix one of the duplicates of the when service cannot be 10 summons to some conspicuous part of the house or homestead in which the person effected as summoned ordinarily resides; and thereupon the Court, after making such inquiries as it before thinks fit, may either declare that the summons has been duly served or order fresh service provided. in such manner as it considers proper. 68. (1) Where the person summoned is in the active service of the Government, the Service on 15 Court issuing the summons shall ordinarily send it in duplicate to the head of the office in Government servant. which such person is employed; and such head shall thereupon cause the summons to be served in the manner provided by section 64, and shall return it to the Court under his signature with the endorsement required by that section. (2) Such signature shall be evidence of due service. 20 69. When a Court desires that a summons issued by it shall be served at any place Service of outside its local jurisdiction, it shall ordinarily send such summons in duplicate to a summons outside local Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the person summoned resides, or is, to be there limits. served. 70. (1) When a summons issued by a Court is served outside its local jurisdiction, and Proof of 25 in any case where the officer who has served a summons is not present at the hearing of the service in such cases and case, an affidavit, purporting to be made before a Magistrate, that such summons has been when serving served, and a duplicate of the summons purporting to be endorsed (in the manner provided officer not by section 64 or section 66) by the person to whom it was delivered or tendered or with present. whom it was left, shall be admissible in evidence, and the statements made therein shall be 30 deemed to be correct unless and until the contrary is proved. (2) The affidavit mentioned in this section may be attached to the duplicate of the summons and returned to the Court. (3) All summons served through electronic communication under sections 64 to 71 shall be considered as duly served and a copy of such electronic summons shall be attested 35 and kept as a proof of service of summons. 71. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding sections of this Chapter, Service of a Court issuing a summons to a witness may, in addition to and simultaneously with the summons on witness by issue of such summons, direct a copy of the summons to be served by electronic post. communication or by registered post addressed to the witness at the place where he ordinarily 40 resides or carries on business or personally works for gain: (2) When an acknowledgement purporting to be signed by the witness or an endorsement purporting to be made by a postal employee that the witness refused to take delivery of the summons has been received or on the proof of delivery of summons under sub-section (3) of section 70 by electronic communication to the satisfaction of the Court, 45 the Court issuing summons may deem that the summons had been duly served. B.—Warrant of arrest 72. (1) Every warrant of arrest issued by a Court under this Sanhita shall be in writing, Form of warrant signed by the presiding officer of such Court and shall bear the seal of the Court. of arrest and duration. (2) Every such warrant shall remain in force until it is cancelled by the Court which issued it, or until it is executed. Power to 73. (1) Any Court issuing a warrant for the arrest of any person may in its discretion direct security direct by endorsement on the warrant that, if such person executes a bond with sufficient to be taken. sureties for his attendance before the Court at a specified time and thereafter until otherwise 5 directed by the Court, the officer to whom the warrant is directed shall take such security and shall release such person from custody. (2) The endorsement shall state— (a) the number of sureties; (b) the amount in which they and the person for whose arrest the warrant is 10 issued, are to be respectively bound; (c) the time at which he is to attend before the Court. (3) Whenever security is taken under this section, the officer to whom the warrant is directed shall forward the bond to the Court. Warrants to 74. (1) A warrant of arrest shall ordinarily be directed to one or more police officers; 15 whom but the Court issuing such a warrant may, if its immediate execution is necessary and no directed. police officer is immediately available, direct it to any other person or persons, and such person or persons shall execute the same. (2) When a warrant is directed to more officers or persons than one, it may be executed by all, or by any one or more of them. 20 Warrant may 75. (1) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class may direct a be directed to warrant to any person within his local jurisdiction for the arrest of any escaped convict, any person. proclaimed offender or of any person who is accused of a non-bailable offence and is evading arrest. (2) Such person shall acknowledge in writing the receipt of the warrant, and shall 25 execute it if the person for whose arrest it was issued, is in, or enters on, any land or other property under his charge. (3) When the person against whom such warrant is issued is arrested, he shall be made over with the warrant to the nearest police officer, who shall cause him to be taken before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, unless security is taken under section 73. 30 Warrant 76. A warrant directed to any police officer may also be executed by any other police directed to officer whose name is endorsed upon the warrant by the officer to whom it is directed or police officer. endorsed. Notification 77. The police officer or other person executing a warrant of arrest shall notify the of substance substance thereof to the person to be arrested, and, if so required, shall show him the 35 of warrant. warrant. Person 78. The police officer or other person executing a warrant of arrest shall (subject to arrested to be the provisions of section 73 as to security) without unnecessary delay bring the person brought before arrested before the Court before which he is required by law to produce such person: Court without delay. Provided that such delay shall not, in any case, exceed twenty-four hours exclusive 40 of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate's Court. Where 79. A warrant of arrest may be executed at any place in India. warrant may be executed. 80. (1) When a warrant is to be executed outside the local jurisdiction of the Court Warrant issuing it, such Court may, instead of directing the warrant to a police officer within its forwarded for jurisdiction, forward it by post or otherwise to any Executive Magistrate or District execution outside Superintendent of Police or Commissioner of Police within the local limits of whose jurisdiction jurisdiction. 5 it is to be executed; and the Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent or Commissioner shall endorse his name thereon, and if practicable, cause it to be executed in the manner hereinbefore provided. (2) The Court issuing a warrant under sub-section (1) shall forward, along with the warrant, the substance of the information against the person to be arrested together with 10 such documents, if any, as may be sufficient to enable the Court acting under section 83 to decide whether bail should or should not be granted to the person. 81. (1) When a warrant directed to a police officer is to be executed beyond the local Warrant jurisdiction of the Court issuing the same, he shall ordinarily take it for endorsement either directed to police officer to an Executive Magistrate or to a police officer not below the rank of an officer in charge of for execution 15 a police station, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the warrant is to be executed. outside jurisdiction. (2) Such Magistrate or police officer shall endorse his name thereon and such endorsement shall be sufficient authority to the police officer to whom the warrant is directed to execute the same, and the local police shall, if so required, assist such officer in executing such warrant. 20 (3) Whenever there is reason to believe that the delay occasioned by obtaining the endorsement of the Magistrate or police officer within whose local jurisdiction the warrant is to be executed will prevent such execution, the police officer to whom it is directed may execute the same without such endorsement in any place beyond the local jurisdiction of the Court which issued it. 25 82. (1) When a warrant of arrest is executed outside the district in which it was issued, Procedure on the person arrested shall, unless the Court which issued the warrant is within thirty kilometers arrest of of the place of arrest or is nearer than the Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent of person against whom warrant Police or Commissioner of Police within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the arrest was issued. made, or unless security is taken under section 73, be taken before such Magistrate or 30 District Superintendent or Commissioner. (2) On the arrest of any person referred to in sub-section (1), the police officer shall forthwith give the information regarding such arrest and the place where the arrested person is being held to the designated police officer in the district and to such officer of another district where the arrested person normally resides. 35 83. (1) The Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent of Police or Commissioner Procedure by of Police shall, if the person arrested appears to be the person intended by the Court which Magistrate before whom issued the warrant, direct his removal in custody to such Court: such person arrested is Provided that, if the offence is bailable, and such person is ready and willing to give brought. bail to the satisfaction of such Magistrate, District Superintendent or Commissioner, or a 40 direction has been endorsed under section 73 on the warrant and such person is ready and willing to give the security required by such direction, the Magistrate, District Superintendent or Commissioner shall take such bail or security, as the case may be, and forward the bond, to the Court which issued the warrant: Provided further that if the offence is a non-bailable one, it shall be lawful for the Chief 45 Judicial Magistrate (subject to the provisions of section 493), or the Sessions Judge, of the district in which the arrest is made on consideration of the information and the documents referred to in sub-section (2) of section 80, to release such person on bail. (2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a police officer from taking security under section 73. C.—Proclamation and attachment Proclamation 84. (1) If any Court has reason to believe (whether after taking evidence or not) that for person any person against whom a warrant has been issued by it has absconded or is concealing absconding. himself so that such warrant cannot be executed, such Court may publish a written proclamation requiring him to appear at a specified place and at a specified time not less 5 than thirty days from the date of publishing such proclamation. (2) The proclamation shall be published as follows:— (i) (a) it shall be publicly read in some conspicuous place of the town or village in which such person ordinarily resides; (b) it shall be affixed to some conspicuous part of the house or homestead in 10 which such person ordinarily resides or to some conspicuous place of such town or village; (c) a copy thereof shall be affixed to some conspicuous part of the Court-house; (ii) the Court may also, if it thinks fit, direct a copy of the proclamation to be 15 published in a daily newspaper circulating in the place in which such person ordinarily resides. (3) A statement in writing by the Court issuing the proclamation to the effect that the proclamation was duly published on a specified day, in the manner specified in clause (i) of sub-section (2), shall be conclusive evidence that the requirements of this section have 20 been complied with, and that the proclamation was published on such day. (4) Where a proclamation published under sub-section (1) is in respect of a person accused of an offence which is made punishable with imprisonment of ten years or more, or imprisonment for life or with death under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or under any other law for the time being in force, and such person fails to appear at the specified place 25 and time required by the proclamation, the Court may, after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, pronounce him a proclaimed offender and make a declaration to that effect. (5) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) shall apply to a declaration made by the Court under sub-section (4) as they apply to the proclamation published under sub-section (1). 30 Attachment 85. (1) The Court issuing a proclamation under section 84 may, for reasons to be of property of recorded in writing, at any time after the issue of the proclamation, order the attachment of person any property, movable or immovable, or both, belonging to the proclaimed person: absconding. Provided that where at the time of the issue of the proclamation the Court is satisfied, by affidavit or otherwise, that the person in relation to whom the proclamation is to be 35 issued,— (a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his property; or (b) is about to remove the whole or any part of his property from the local jurisdiction of the Court, it may order the attachment of property simultaneously with the issue of the proclamation. 40 (2) Such order shall authorise the attachment of any property belonging to such person within the district in which it is made; and it shall authorise the attachment of any property belonging to such person without such district when endorsed by the District Magistrate within whose district such property is situate. (3) If the property ordered to be attached is a debt or other movable property, the 45 attachment under this section shall be made— (a) by seizure; or (b) by the appointment of a receiver; or (c) by an order in writing prohibiting the delivery of such property to the proclaimed person or to any one on his behalf; or (d) by all or any two of such methods, as the Court thinks fit. 5 (4) If the property ordered to be attached is immovable, the attachment under this section shall, in the case of land paying revenue to the State Government, be made through the Collector of the district in which the land is situate, and in all other cases— (a) by taking possession; or (b) by the appointment of a receiver; or 10 (c) by an order in writing prohibiting the payment of rent on delivery of property to the proclaimed person or to any one on his behalf; or (d) by all or any two of such methods, as the Court thinks fit. (5) If the property ordered to be attached consists of live-stock or is of a perishable nature, the Court may, if it thinks it expedient, order immediate sale thereof, and in such case 15 the proceeds of the sale shall abide the order of the Court. (6) The powers, duties and liabilities of a receiver appointed under this section shall 5 of 1908. be the same as those of a receiver appointed under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 86. The Court may, on the written request from a police officer not below the rank of Identification the Superintendent of Police or Commissioner of Police, initiate the process of requesting and attachment of 20 assistance from a Court or an authority in the contracting State for identification, attachment property of and forfeiture of property belonging to a proclaimed person in accordance with the procedure proclaimed provided in Chapter VIII. person. 87. (1) If any claim is preferred to, or objection made to the attachment of, any Claims and property attached under section 85, within six months from the date of such attachment, by objections to attachment. 25 any person other than the proclaimed person, on the ground that the claimant or objector has an interest in such property, and that such interest is not liable to attachment under section 85, the claim or objection shall be inquired into, and may be allowed or disallowed in whole or in part: Provided that any claim preferred or objection made within the period allowed by this 30 sub-section may, in the event of the death of the claimant or objector, be continued by his legal representative. (2) Claims or objections under sub-section (1) may be preferred or made in the Court by which the order of attachment is issued, or, if the claim or objection is in respect of property attached under an order endorsed under sub-section (2) of section 85, in the Court 35 of the Chief Judicial Magistrate of the district in which the attachment is made. (3) Every such claim or objection shall be inquired into by the Court in which it is preferred or made: Provided that, if it is preferred or made in the Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate, he may make it over for disposal to any Magistrate subordinate to him. 40 (4) Any person whose claim or objection has been disallowed in whole or in part by an order under sub-section (1) may, within a period of one year from the date of such order, institute a suit to establish the right which he claims in respect of the property in dispute; but subject to the result of such suit, if any, the order shall be conclusive. 88. (1) If the proclaimed person appears within the time specified in the proclamation, Release, sale 45 the Court shall make an order releasing the property from the attachment. and restoration of (2) If the proclaimed person does not appear within the time specified in the attached proclamation, the property under the attachment shall be at the disposal of the State property. Government; but it shall not be sold until the expiration of six months from the date of the attachment and until any claim preferred or objection made under section 87 has been disposed of under that section, unless it is subject to speedy and natural decay, or the Court considers that the sale would be for the benefit of the owner; in either of which cases the Court may cause it to be sold whenever it thinks fit. 5 (3) If, within two years from the date of the attachment, any person whose property is or has been at the disposal of the State Government, under sub-section (2), appears voluntarily or is apprehended and brought before the Court by whose order the property was attached, or the Court to which such Court is subordinate, and proves to the satisfaction of such Court that he did not abscond or conceal himself for the purpose of avoiding execution of 10 the warrant, and that he had not such notice of the proclamation as to enable him to attend within the time specified therein, such property, or, if the same has been sold, the net proceeds of the sale, or, if part only thereof has been sold, the net proceeds of the sale and the residue of the property, shall, after satisfying therefrom all costs incurred in consequence of the attachment, be delivered to him. 15 Appeal from 89. Any person referred to in sub-section (3) of section 88, who is aggrieved by any order rejecting refusal to deliver property or the proceeds of the sale thereof may appeal to the Court to application which appeals ordinarily lie from the sentences of the first-mentioned Court. for restoration of attached property. D.—Other rules regarding processes Issue of 90. A Court may, in any case in which it is empowered by this Sanhita to issue a 20 warrant in lieu summons for the appearance of any person, issue, after recording its reasons in writing, a of, or in warrant for his arrest— addition to, summons. (a) if, either before the issue of such summons, or after the issue of the same but before the time fixed for his appearance, the Court sees reason to believe that he has absconded or will not obey the summons; or 25 (b) if at such time he fails to appear and the summons is proved to have been duly served in time to admit of his appearing in accordance therewith and no reasonable excuse is offered for such failure. Power to take 91. When any person for whose appearance or arrest the officer presiding in any bond for Court is empowered to issue a summons or warrant, is present in such Court, such officer 30 appearance. may require such person to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for his appearance in such Court, or any other Court to which the case may be transferred for trial. Arrest on 92. When any person who is bound by any bond taken under this Sanhita to appear breach of bond before a Court, does not appear, the officer presiding in such Court may issue a warrant for directing that such person be arrested and produced before him. 35 appearance. Provisions of 93. The provisions contained in this Chapter relating to summons and warrant, and this Chapter their issue, service and execution, shall, so far as may be, apply to every summons and generally every warrant of arrest issued under this Sanhita. applicable to summoneses and warrants of arrest. CHAPTER VII 40 PROCESSES TO COMPEL THE PRODUCTION OF THINGS A.—Summons to produce Summons to 94. (1) Whenever any Court or any officer in charge of a police station considers that produce the production of any document, electronic communication, including communication document or devices which is likely to contain digital evidence or other thing is necessary or desirable 45 other thing. for the purposes of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita by or before such Court or officer, such Court or officer may, by a written order, either in physical form or in electronic form, require the person in whose possession or power such document or thing is believed to be, to attend and produce it, or to produce it, at the time and place stated in the summons or order. 5 (2) Any person required under this section merely to produce a document, or other thing shall be deemed to have complied with the requisition if he causes such document or thing to be produced instead of attending personally to produce the same. (3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed— (a) to affect sections 129 and 130 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 or 13 of 1891.10 the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891; or (b) to apply to a letter, postcard, or other document or any parcel or thing in the custody of the postal authority. 95. (1) If any document, parcel or thing in the custody of a postal authority is, in the Procedure as opinion of the District Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court of Session or High Court to letters and 15 wanted for the purpose of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this telegrams. Sanhita, such Magistrate or Court may require the postal authority to deliver the document, parcel or thing to such person as the Magistrate or Court directs. (2) If any such document, parcel or thing is, in the opinion of any other Magistrate, whether Executive or Judicial, or of any Commissioner of Police or District Superintendent 20 of Police, wanted for any such purpose, he may require the postal authority to cause search to be made for and to detain such document, parcel or thing pending the order of a District Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate or Court under sub-section (1). B.—Search-warrants 96. (1) (a) Where any Court has reason to believe that a person to whom a summons When search- 25 order under section 94 or a requisition under sub-section (1) of section 95 has been, or warrant may be issued. might be, addressed, will not or would not produce the document or thing as required by such summons or requisition; or (b) where such document or thing is not known to the Court to be in the possession of any person; or 30 (c) where the Court considers that the purposes of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita will be served by a general search or inspection, it may issue a search-warrant; and the person to whom such warrant is directed, may search or inspect in accordance therewith and the provisions hereinafter contained. (2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, specify in the warrant the particular place or part 35 thereof to which only the search or inspection shall extend; and the person charged with the execution of such warrant shall then search or inspect only the place or part so specified. (3) Nothing contained in this section shall authorise any Magistrate other than a District Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate to grant a warrant to search for a document, parcel or other thing in the custody of the postal or telegraph authority. 40 97. (1) If a District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first Search of class, upon information and after such inquiry as he thinks necessary, has reason to believe place suspected to that any place is used for the deposit or sale of stolen property, or for the deposit, sale or contain stolen production of any objectionable article to which this section applies, or that any such property, objectionable article is deposited in any place, he may by warrant authorise any police forged 45 officer above the rank of a constable— documents, etc. (a) to enter, with such assistance as may be required, such place; (b) to search the same in the manner specified in the warrant; (c) to take possession of any property or article therein found which he reasonably suspects to be stolen property or objectionable article to which this section applies; (d) to convey such property or article before a Magistrate, or to guard the same on the spot until the offender is taken before a Magistrate, or otherwise to dispose of 5 it in some place of safety; (e) to take into custody and carry before a Magistrate every person found in such place who appears to have been privy to the deposit, sale or production of any such property or article knowing or having reasonable cause to suspect it to be stolen property or, as the case may be, objectionable article to which this section 10 applies. (2) The objectionable articles to which this section applies are— (a) counterfeit coin; (b) pieces of metal made in contravention of the Coinage Act, 2011, or brought 11 of 2011. into India in contravention of any notification for the time being in force issued under 15 52 of 1962. section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962; (c) counterfeit currency note; counterfeit stamps; (d) forged documents; (e) false seals; (f) obscene objects referred to in section 292 of the Bharatiya Nyaya 20 Sanhita, 2023; (g) instruments or materials used for the production of any of the articles mentioned in clauses (a) to (f). Power to 98. (1) Where— declare certain publications (a) any newspaper, or book; or 25 forfeited and (b) any document, to issue search- wherever printed, appears to the State Government to contain any matter the publication warrants for of which is punishable under section 150 or section 194 or section 195 or section 292 or same. section 293 or section 297 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the State Government may, by notification, stating the grounds of its opinion, declare every copy of the issue of the 30 newspaper containing such matter, and every copy of such book or other document to be forfeited to Government, and thereupon any police officer may seize the same wherever found in India and any Magistrate may by warrant authorise any police officer not below the rank of sub-inspector to enter upon and search for the same in any premises where any copy of such issue, or any such book or other document may be or may be reasonably 35 suspected to be. (2) In this section and in section 99,— (a) "newspaper" and "book" have the same meaning as in the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867; 25 of 1867. (b) "document" includes any painting, drawing or photograph, or other visible 40 representation. (3) No order passed or action taken under this section shall be called in question in any Court otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of section 99. Application to 99. (1) Any person having any interest in any newspaper, book or other document, in High Court to respect of which a declaration of forfeiture has been made under section 98, may, within two 45 set aside months from the date of publication in the Official Gazette of such declaration, apply to the declaration of forfeiture. High Court to set aside such declaration on the ground that the issue of the newspaper, or the book or other document, in respect of which the declaration was made, did not contain any such matter as is referred to in sub-section (1) of section 98. (2) Every such application shall, where the High Court consists of three or more Judges, be heard and determined by a Special Bench of the High Court composed of three 5 Judges and where the High Court consists of less than three Judges, such Special Bench shall be composed of all the Judges of that High Court. (3) On the hearing of any such application with reference to any newspaper, any copy of such newspaper may be given in evidence in aid of the proof of the nature or tendency of the words, signs or visible representations contained in such newspaper, in respect of 10 which the declaration of forfeiture was made. (4) The High Court shall, if it is not satisfied that the issue of the newspaper, or the book or other document, in respect of which the application has been made, contained any such matter as is referred to in sub-section (1) of section 98, set aside the declaration of forfeiture. 15 (5) Where there is a difference of opinion among the Judges forming the Special Bench, the decision shall be in accordance with the opinion of the majority of those Judges. 100. If any District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first Search for class has reason to believe that any person is confined under such circumstances that the persons wrongfully confinement amounts to an offence, he may issue a search-warrant, and the person to confined. 20 whom such warrant is directed may search for the person so confined; and such search shall be made in accordance therewith, and the person, if found, shall be immediately taken before a Magistrate, who shall make such order as in the circumstances of the case seems proper. 101. Upon complaint made on oath of the abduction or unlawful detention of a Power to 25 woman, or a female child under the age of eighteen years for any unlawful purpose, a compel restoration of District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class may make an abducted order for the immediate restoration of such woman to her liberty, or of such female child to females. her husband, parent, guardian or other person having the lawful charge of such child, and may compel compliance with such order, using such force as may be necessary. 30 102. The provisions of sections 32, 72, 74, 76, 79, 80 and 81 shall, so far as may be, Direction, apply to all search-warrants issued under section 96, section 97, section 98 or section 100. etc., of search- warrants. 103. (1) Whenever any place liable to search or inspection under this Chapter is Persons in closed, any person residing in, or being in charge of, such place, shall, on demand of the charge of closed place to officer or other person executing the warrant, and on production of the warrant, allow him allow search. 35 free ingress thereto, and afford all reasonable facilities for a search therein. (2) If ingress into such place cannot be so obtained, the officer or other person executing the warrant may proceed in the manner provided by sub-section (2) of section 44. (3) Where any person in or about such place is reasonably suspected of concealing about his person any article for which search should be made, such person may be searched 40 and if such person is a woman, the search shall be made by another woman with strict regard to decency. (4) Before making a search under this Chapter, the officer or other person about to make it shall call upon two or more independent and respectable inhabitants of the locality in which the place to be searched is situate or of any other locality if no such inhabitant of 45 the said locality is available or is willing to be a witness to the search, to attend and witness the search and may issue an order in writing to them or any of them so to do. (5) The search shall be made in their presence, and a list of all things seized in the course of such search and of the places in which they are respectively found shall be prepared by such officer or other person and signed by such witnesses; but no person witnessing a search under this section shall be required to attend the Court as a witness of the search unless specially summoned by it. (6) The occupant of the place searched, or some person in his behalf, shall, in every instance, be permitted to attend during the search, and a copy of the list prepared under this 5 section, signed by the said witnesses, shall be delivered to such occupant or person. (7) When any person is searched under sub-section (3), a list of all things taken possession of shall be prepared, and a copy thereof shall be delivered to such person. (8) Any person who, without reasonable cause, refuses or neglects to attend and witness a search under this section, when called upon to do so by an order in writing 10 delivered or tendered to him, shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 220 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. Disposal of 104. When, in the execution of a search-warrant at any place beyond the local things found jurisdiction of the Court which issued the same, any of the things for which search is made, in search are found, such things, together with the list of the same prepared under the provisions 15 beyond jurisdiction. hereinafter contained, shall be immediately taken before the Court issuing the warrant, unless such place is nearer to the Magistrate having jurisdiction therein than to such Court, in which case the list and things shall be immediately taken before such Magistrate; and, unless there be good cause to the contrary, such Magistrate shall make an order authorising them to be taken to such Court. 20 C.—Miscellaneous Recording of 105. The process of conducting search of a place or taking possession of any property, search and article or thing under this Chapter or under section 185, including preparation of the list of seizure all things seized in the course of such search and seizure and signing of such list by through audio- video witnesses, shall be recorded through any audio-video electronic means preferably cell 25 electronic phone and the police officer shall without delay forward such recording to the District means. Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class. Power of 106. (1) Any police officer may seize any property which may be alleged or suspected police officer to have been stolen, or which may be found under circumstances which create suspicion of to seize the commission of any offence. 30 certain property. (2) Such police officer, if subordinate to the officer in charge of a police station, shall forthwith report the seizure to that officer. (3) Every police officer acting under sub-section (1) shall forthwith report the seizure to the Magistrate having jurisdiction and where the property seized is such that it cannot be conveniently transported to the Court, or where there is difficulty in securing proper 35 accommodation for the custody of such property, or where the continued retention of the property in police custody may not be considered necessary for the purpose of investigation, he may give custody thereof to any person on his executing a bond undertaking to produce the property before the Court as and when required and to give effect to the further orders of the Court as to the disposal of the same: 40 Provided that where the property seized under sub-section (1) is subject to speedy and natural decay and if the person entitled to the possession of such property is unknown or absent and the value of such property is less than five hundred rupees, it may forthwith be sold by auction under the orders of the Superintendent of Police and the provisions of sections 505 and 506 shall, as nearly as may be practicable, apply to the net proceeds of 45 such sale. Attachment, 107. (1) Where a police officer making an investigation has reason to believe that any forfeiture or property is derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, as a result of a criminal activity or from restoration of the commission of any offence, he may, with the approval of the Superintendent of Police or property. Commissioner of Police, make an application to the Court or the Judicial Magistrate exercising 50 jurisdiction to take cognizance of the offence or commit for trial or try the case, for the attachment of such property. (2) If the Court or the Judicial Magistrate has reasons to believe, whether before or after taking evidence, that all or any of such properties are proceeds of crime, the Court or 5 the Magistrate may issue a notice upon such person calling upon him to show cause within a period of fourteen days as to why an order of attachment shall not be made. (3) Where the notice issued to any person under sub-section (2) specifies any property as being held by any other person on behalf of such person, a copy of the notice shall also be served upon such other person. 10 (4) The Court or the Judicial Magistrate may, after considering the explanation, if any, to the show-cause notice issued under sub-section (2) and the material fact available before such Court or Magistrate and after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to such person or persons, may pass an order of attachment, in respect of those properties which are found to be the proceeds of crime: 15 Provided that if such person does not appear before the Court or the Magistrate or represent his case before the Court or Judicial Magistrate within a period of fourteen days specified in the show-cause notice, the Court or the Judicial Magistrate may proceed to pass the ex-parte order. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if the Court or the Judicial 20 Magistrate is of the opinion that issuance of notice under the said sub-section would defeat the object of attachment or seizure, the Court or Judicial Magistrate may by an interim order passed ex-parte direct attachment or seizure of such property, and such order shall remain in force till an order under sub-section (6) is passed. (6) If the Court or the Judicial Magistrate finds the attached or seized properties to be 25 the proceeds of crime, the Court or the Judicial Magistrate shall by order direct the District Magistrate to rateably distribute such proceeds of crime to the persons who are affected by such crime. (7) On receipt of an order passed under sub-section (6), the District Magistrate shall, within a period of sixty days distribute the proceeds of crime either by himself or authorise 30 any officer subordinate to him to effect such distribution. (8) If there are no claimants to receive such proceeds or no claimant is ascertainable or there is any surplus after satisfying the claimants, such proceeds of crime shall stand forfeited to the Government. Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the word ‘‘property’’ and the 35 expression ‘‘proceeds of crime’’ shall have the meaning assigned to them in clause (d) of section 111. 108. Any Magistrate may direct a search to be made in his presence of any place for Magistrate the search of which he is competent to issue a search-warrant. may direct search in his presence. 109. Any Court may, if it thinks fit, impound any document or thing produced before Power to 40 it under this Sanhita. impound document, etc., produced. 110. (1) Where a Court in the territories to which this Sanhita extends (hereafter in this Reciprocal section referred to as the said territories) desires that— arrangements regarding (a) a summons to an accused person; or processes. (b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person; or 45 (c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a document or other thing, or to produce it; or (d) a search-warrant, issued by it shall be served or executed at any place,— (i) within the local jurisdiction of a Court in any State or area in India outside the said territories, it may send such summons or warrant in duplicate by post or otherwise, to the presiding officer of that Court to be served or executed; and where any summons 5 referred to in clause (a) or clause (c) has been so served, the provisions of section 70 shall apply in relation to such summons as if the presiding officer of the Court to whom it is sent were a Magistrate in the said territories; (ii) in any country or place outside India in respect of which arrangements have been made by the Central Government with the Government of such country or place 10 for service or execution of summons or warrant in relation to criminal matters (hereafter in this section referred to as the contracting State), it may send such summons or warrant in duplicate in such form, directed to such Court, Judge or Magistrate, and send to such authority for transmission, as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf. 15 (2) Where a Court in the said territories has received for service or execution— (a) a summons to an accused person; or (b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person; or (c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a document or other thing, or to produce it; or 20 (d) a search-warrant, issued by— (I) a Court in any State or area in India outside the said territories; (II) a Court, Judge or Magistrate in a contracting State, it shall cause the same to be served or executed as if it were a summons or warrant received 25 by it from another Court in the said territories for service or execution within its local jurisdiction; and where— (i) a warrant of arrest has been executed, the person arrested shall, so far as possible, be dealt with in accordance with the procedure specified by sections 82 and 83; (ii) a search-warrant has been executed, the things found in the search shall, so 30 far as possible, be dealt with in accordance with the procedure specified by section 104: Provided that in a case where a summons or search-warrant received from a contracting State has been executed, the documents or things produced or things found in the search shall be forwarded to the Court issuing the summons or search-warrant through such 35 authority as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf. CHAPTER VIII RECIPROCAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR ASSISTANCE IN CERTAIN MATTERS AND PROCEDURE FOR ATTACHMENT AND FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY Definitions. 111. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,— 40 (a) "contracting State" means any country or place outside India in respect of which arrangements have been made by the Central Government with the Government of such country through a treaty or otherwise; (b) "identifying" includes establishment of a proof that the property was derived from, or used in, the commission of an offence; 45 (c) "proceeds of crime" means any property derived or obtained directly or indirectly, by any person as a result of criminal activity (including crime involving currency transfers) or the value of any such property; (d) "property" means property and assets of every description whether corporeal 5 or incorporeal, movable or immovable, tangible or intangible and deeds and instruments evidencing title to, or interest in, such property or assets derived or used in the commission of an offence and includes property obtained through proceeds of crime; (e) "tracing" means determining the nature, source, disposition, movement, title or ownership of property. 10 112. (1) If, in the course of an investigation into an offence, an application is made by Letter of the investigating officer or any officer superior in rank to the investigating officer that request to competent evidence may be available in a country or place outside India, any Criminal Court may issue authority for a letter of request to a Court or an authority in that country or place competent to deal with investigation such request to examine orally any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and in a country 15 circumstances of the case and to record his statement made in the course of such examination or place outside India. and also to require such person or any other person to produce any document or thing which may be in his possession pertaining to the case and to forward all the evidence so taken or collected or the authenticated copies thereof or the thing so collected to the Court issuing such letter. 20 (2) The letter of request shall be transmitted in such manner as the Central Government may specify in this behalf. (3) Every statement recorded or document or thing received under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be the evidence collected during the course of investigation under this Chapter. 25 113. (1) Upon receipt of a letter of request from a Court or an authority in a country or Letter of place outside India competent to issue such letter in that country or place for the examination request from a country or of any person or production of any document or thing in relation to an offence under place outside investigation in that country or place, the Central Government may, if it thinks fit— India to a Court or an (i) forward the same to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate as he authority for 30 may appoint in this behalf, who shall thereupon summon the person before him and investigation record his statement or cause the document or thing to be produced; or in India. (ii) send the letter to any police officer for investigation, who shall thereupon investigate into the offence in the same manner, as if the offence had been committed within India. 35 (2) All the evidence taken or collected under sub-section (1), or authenticated copies thereof or the thing so collected, shall be forwarded by the Magistrate or police officer, as the case may be, to the Central Government for transmission to the Court or the authority issuing the letter of request, in such manner as the Central Government may deem fit. 114. (1) Where a Court in India, in relation to a criminal matter, desires that a warrant Assistance in 40 for arrest of any person to attend or produce a document or other thing issued by it shall be securing transfer of executed in any place in a contracting State, it shall send such warrant in duplicate in such persons. form to such Court, Judge or Magistrate through such authority, as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf and that Court, Judge or Magistrate, as the case may be, shall cause the same to be executed. 45 (2) If , in the course of an investigation or any inquiry into an offence, an application is made by the investigating officer or any officer superior in rank to the investigating officer that the attendance of a person who is in any place in a contracting State is required in connection with such investigation or inquiry and the Court is satisfied that such attendance is so required, it shall issue a summons or warrant, in duplicate, against the said person to such Court, Judge or Magistrate, in such form as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, to cause the same to be served or executed. (3) Where a Court in India, in relation to a criminal matter, has received a warrant for arrest of any person requiring him to attend or attend and produce a document or other thing in that Court or before any other investigating agency, issued by a Court, Judge or 5 Magistrate in a contracting State, the same shall be executed as if it is the warrant received by it from another Court in India for execution within its local limits. (4) Where a person transferred to a contracting State pursuant to sub-section (3) is a prisoner in India, the Court in India or the Central Government may impose such conditions as that Court or Government deems fit. 10 (5) Where the person transferred to India pursuant to sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) is a prisoner in a contracting State, the Court in India shall ensure that the conditions subject to which the prisoner is transferred to India are complied with and such prisoner shall be kept in such custody subject to such conditions as the Central Government may direct in writing. 15 Assistance in 115. (1) Where a Court in India has reasonable grounds to believe that any property relation to obtained by any person is derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, by such person from orders of the commission of an offence, it may make an order of attachment or forfeiture of such attachment or forfeiture of property, as it may deem fit under the provisions of sections 116 to 122 (both inclusive). property. (2) Where the Court has made an order for attachment or forfeiture of any property 20 under sub-section (1), and such property is suspected to be in a contracting State, the Court may issue a letter of request to a Court or an authority in the contracting State for execution of such order. (3) Where a letter of request is received by the Central Government from a Court or an authority in a contracting State requesting attachment or forfeiture of the property in India, 25 derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, by any person from the commission of an offence committed in that contracting State, the Central Government may forward such letter of request to the Court, as it thinks fit, for execution in accordance with the provisions of sections 116 to 122 (both inclusive) or, as the case may be, any other law for the time being in force. 30 Identifying 116. (1) The Court shall, under sub-section (1), or on receipt of a letter of request unlawfully under sub-section (3) of section 115, direct any police officer not below the rank of acquired Sub-Inspector of Police to take all steps necessary for tracing and identifying such property. property. (2) The steps referred to in sub-section (1) may include any inquiry, investigation or survey in respect of any person, place, property, assets, documents, books of account in 35 any bank or public financial institutions or any other relevant matters. (3) Any inquiry, investigation or survey referred to in sub-section (2) shall be carried out by an officer mentioned in sub-section (1) in accordance with such directions issued by the said Court in this behalf. Seizure or 117. (1) Where any officer conducting an inquiry or investigation under section 116 40 attachment of has a reason to believe that any property in relation to which such inquiry or investigation property. is being conducted is likely to be concealed transferred or dealt with in any manner which will result in disposal of such property, he may make an order for seizing such property and where it is not practicable to seize such property, he may make an order of attachment directing that such property shall not be transferred or otherwise dealt with, except with the 45 prior permission of the officer making such order, and a copy of such order shall be served on the person concerned. (2) Any order made under sub-section (1) shall have no effect unless the said order is confirmed by an order of the said Court, within a period of thirty days of its being made. 118. (1) The Court may appoint the District Magistrate of the area where the property Management is situated, or any other officer that may be nominated by the District Magistrate, to perform of properties seized or the functions of an Administrator of such property. forfeited under this Chapter. (2) The Administrator appointed under sub-section (1) shall receive and manage the 5 property in relation to which the order has been made under sub-section (1) of section 117 or under section 120 in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified by the Central Government. (3) The Administrator shall also take such measures, as the Central Government may direct, to dispose of the property which is forfeited to the Central Government. 10 119. (1) If as a result of the inquiry, investigation or survey under section 116, the Notice of Court has reason to believe that all or any of such properties are proceeds of crime, it may forfeiture of property. serve a notice upon such person (hereinafter referred to as the person affected) calling upon him within a period of thirty days specified in the notice to indicate the source of income, earnings or assets, out of which or by means of which he has acquired such 15 property, the evidence on which he relies and other relevant information and particulars, and to show cause why all or any of such properties, as the case may be, should not be declared to be proceeds of crime and forfeited to the Central Government. (2) Where a notice under sub-section (1) to any person specifies any property as being held on behalf of such person by any other person, a copy of the notice shall also be 20 served upon such other person. 120. (1) The Court may, after considering the explanation, if any, to the show-cause Forfeiture of notice issued under section 119 and the material available before it and after giving to the property in certain cases. person affected (and in a case where the person affected holds any property specified in the notice through any other person, to such other person also) a reasonable opportunity of 25 being heard, by order, record a finding whether all or any of the properties in question are proceeds of crime: Provided that if the person affected (and in a case where the person affected holds any property specified in the notice through any other person such other person also) does not appear before the Court or represent his case before it within a period of thirty days 30 specified in the show-cause notice, the Court may proceed to record a finding under this sub-section ex parte on the basis of evidence available before it. (2) Where the Court is satisfied that some of the properties referred to in the show-cause notice are proceeds of crime but it is not possible to identify specifically such properties, then, it shall be lawful for the Court to specify the properties which, to the 35 best of its judegment, are proceeds of crime and record a finding accordingly under sub-section (1). (3) Where the Court records a finding under this section to the effect that any property is proceeds of crime, such property shall stand forfeited to the Central Government free from all encumbrances. 40 (4) Where any shares in a company stand forfeited to the Central Government under this section, then, the company shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies 18 of 2013. Act, 2013 or forthwith register the Central Government as the transferee of such shares. 121. (1) Where the Court makes a declaration that any property stands forfeited to Fine in lieu of the Central Government under section 120 and it is a case where the source of only a part of forfeiture. 45 such property has not been proved to the satisfaction of the Court, it shall make an order giving an option to the person affected to pay, in lieu of forfeiture, a fine equal to the market value of such part. (2) Before making an order imposing a fine under sub-section (1), the person affected shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (3) Where the person affected pays the fine due under sub-section (1), within such time as may be allowed in that behalf, the Court may, by order, revoke the declaration of forfeiture under section 120 and thereupon such property shall stand released. Certain 122. Where after the making of an order under sub-section (1) of section 117 or the transfers to be issue of a notice under section 119, any property referred to in the said order or notice is 5 null and void. transferred by any mode whatsoever such transfers shall, for the purposes of the proceedings under this Chapter, be ignored and if such property is subsequently forfeited to the Central Government under section 120, then, the transfer of such property shall be deemed to be null and void. Procedure in 123. Every letter of request, summons or warrant, received by the Central Government 10 respect of from, and every letter of request, summons or warrant, to be transmitted to a contracting letter of State under this Chapter shall be transmitted to a contracting State or, as the case may be, request. sent to the concerned Court in India in such form and in such manner as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf. Application of 124. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that 15 this Chapter. the application of this Chapter in relation to a contracting State with which reciprocal arrangements have been made, shall be subject to such conditions, exceptions or qualifications as are specified in the said notification. CHAPTER IX SECURITY FOR KEEPING THE PEACE AND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR 20 Security for 125. (1) When a Court of Session or Court of a Magistrate of the first class convicts keeping peace a person of any of the offences specified in sub-section (2) or of abetting any such offence on conviction. and is of opinion that it is necessary to take security from such person for keeping the peace, the Court may, at the time of passing sentence on such person, order him to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for keeping the peace for such period, not exceeding three 25 years, as it thinks fit. (2) The offences referred to in sub-section (1) are— (a) any offence punishable under Chapter VIII of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, other than an offence punishable under section 191 or section 194 or section 195 thereof; 30 (b) any offence which consists of, or includes, assault or using criminal force or committing mischief; (c) any offence of criminal intimidation; (d) any other offence which caused, or was intended or known to be likely to cause, a breach of the peace. 35 (3) If the conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, the bond so executed shall become void. (4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by a Court when exercising its powers of revision. Security for 126. (1) When an Executive Magistrate receives information that any person is likely 40 keeping peace to commit a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquility or to do any wrongful act in other cases. that may probably occasion a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquility and is of opinion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding, he may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond with or without sureties, for keeping the peace for such period, not exceeding one 45 year, as the Magistrate thinks fit. (2) Proceedings under this section may be taken before any Executive Magistrate when either the place where the breach of the peace or disturbance is apprehended is within his local jurisdiction or there is within such jurisdiction a person who is likely to commit a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquility or to do any wrongful act as aforesaid beyond such jurisdiction. 127. (1) When an Executive Magistrate receives information that there is within his Security for 5 local jurisdiction any person who, within or without such jurisdiction,— good behaviour (i) either orally or in writing or in any other manner, intentionally disseminates from persons or attempts to disseminate or abets the dissemination of,— disseminating seditious (a) any matter the publication of which is punishable under section 150 or matters. section 194 or section 195 or section 297 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, or 10 (b) any matter concerning a Judge acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties which amounts to criminal intimidation or defamation under the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, (ii) makes, produces, publishes or keeps for sale, imports, exports, conveys, sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly exhibits or in any other manner puts into 15 circulation any obscene matter such as is referred to in section 292 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and the Magistrate is of opinion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding, the Magistrate may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for his good behaviour for such 20 period, not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit. (2) No proceedings shall be taken under this section against the editor, proprietor, printer or publisher of any publication registered under, and edited, printed and published in conformity with, the rules laid down in the Press and Registration of Periodicals Act, 2023 with reference to any matter contained in such publication except by the order or under the 25 authority of the State Government or some officer empowered by the State Government in this behalf. 128. When an Executive Magistrate receives information that there is within his local Security for jurisdiction a person taking precautions to conceal his presence and that there is reason to good behaviour believe that he is doing so with a view to committing a cognizable offence, the Magistrate from 30 may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should suspected not be ordered to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for his good behaviour for such persons. period, not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit. 129. When an Executive Magistrate receives information that there is within his local Security for jurisdiction a person who— good behaviour from habitual 35 (a) is by habit a robber, house-breaker, thief, or forger, or offenders. (b) is by habit a receiver of stolen property knowing the same to have been stolen, or (c) habitually protects or harbours thieves, or aids in the concealment or disposal of stolen property, or 40 (d) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of, the offence of kidnapping, abduction, extortion, cheating or mischief, or any offence punishable under Chapter XII of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, or under section 176, section 177, section 178 or section 179 of that Sanhita, or (e) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of, 45 offences, involving a breach of the peace, or (f) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of— (i) any offence under one or more of the following Acts, namely:— (a) the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940; 23 of 1940. (b) the Foreigners Act, 1946; 31 of 1946. (c) the Employees' Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions 19 of 1952. Act, 1952; 5 (d) the Essential Commodities Act, 1955; 10 of 1955. (e) the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955; 22 of 1955. (f) the Customs Act, 1962; 52 of 1962. (g) the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006; or 34 of 2006. (ii) any offence punishable under any other law providing for the 10 prevention of hoarding or profiteering or of adulteration of food or drugs or of corruption, or (g) is so desperate and dangerous to render his being at large without security hazardous to the community, such Magistrate may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show 15 cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond, with sureties, for his good behaviour for such period, not exceeding three years, as the Magistrate thinks fit. Order to be 130. When a Magistrate acting under section 126, section 127, section 128 or made. section 129, deems it necessary to require any person to show cause under such section, he shall make an order in writing, setting forth the substance of the information received, the 20 amount of the bond to be executed, the term for which it is to be in force and the number of sureties, after considering the fitness for payment of sureties. Procedure in 131. If the person in respect of whom such order is made is present in Court, it shall respect of be read over to him, or, if he so desires, the substance thereof shall be explained to him. person present in Court. Summons or 132. If such person is not present in Court, the Magistrate shall issue a summons 25 warrant in requiring him to appear, or, when such person is in custody, a warrant directing the officer case of person in whose custody he is to bring him before the Court: not so present. Provided that whenever it appears to such Magistrate, upon the report of a police officer or upon other information (the substance of which report or information shall be recorded by the Magistrate), that there is reason to fear the commission of a breach of the 30 peace, and that such breach of the peace cannot be prevented otherwise than by the immediate arrest of such person, the Magistrate may at any time issue a warrant for his arrest. Copy of order 133. Every summons or warrant issued under section 132 shall be accompanied by a to accompany copy of the order made under section 130, and such copy shall be delivered by the officer 35 summons or serving or executing such summons or warrant to the person served with, or arrested under, warrant. the same. Power to 134. The Magistrate may, if he sees sufficient cause, dispense with the personal dispense with attendance of any person called upon to show cause why he should not be ordered to personal execute a bond for keeping the peace or for good behaviour and may permit him to appear 40 attendance. by a pleader. Inquiry as to 135. (1) When an order under section 130 has been read or explained under truth of section 131 to a person present in Court, or when any person appears or is brought before information. a Magistrate in compliance with, or in execution of, a summons or warrant, issued under section 132, the Magistrate shall proceed to inquire into the truth of the information upon 45 which action has been taken, and to take such further evidence as may appear necessary. (2) Such inquiry shall be made, as nearly as may be practicable, in the manner hereinafter prescribed for conducting trial and recording evidence in summons-cases. (3) After the commencement, and before the completion, of the inquiry under sub-section (1), the Magistrate, if he considers that immediate measures are necessary for 5 the prevention of a breach of the peace or disturbance of the public tranquility or the commission of any offence or for the public safety, may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct the person in respect of whom the order under section 130 has been made to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for keeping the peace or maintaining good behaviour until the conclusion of the inquiry, and may detain him in custody until such bond is 10 executed or, in default of execution, until the inquiry is concluded: Provided that— (a) no person against whom proceedings are not being taken under section 127, section 128, or section 129 shall be directed to execute a bond for maintaining good behaviour; 15 (b) the conditions of such bond, whether as to the amount thereof or as to the provision of sureties or the number thereof or the pecuniary extent of their liability, shall not be more onerous than those specified in the order under section 130. (4) For the purposes of this section the fact that a person is an habitual offender or is so desperate and dangerous as to render his being at large without security hazardous to 20 the community may be proved by evidence of general repute or otherwise. (5) Where two or more persons have been associated together in the matter under inquiry, they may be dealt within the same or separate inquiries as the Magistrate shall think just. (6) The inquiry under this section shall be completed within a period of six months 25 from the date of its commencement, and if such inquiry is not so completed, the proceedings under this Chapter shall, on the expiry of the said period, stand terminated unless, for special reasons to be recorded in writing, the Magistrate otherwise directs: Provided that where any person has been kept in detention pending such inquiry, the proceeding against that person, unless terminated earlier, shall stand terminated on the 30 expiry of a period of six months of such detention. (7) Where any direction is made under sub-section (6) permitting the continuance of proceedings the Sessions Judge may, on an application made to him by the aggrieved party, vacate such direction if he is satisfied that it was not based on any special reason or was perverse. 35 136. If, upon such inquiry, it is proved that it is necessary for keeping the peace or Order to give maintaining good behaviour, as the case may be, that the person in respect of whom the security. inquiry is made should execute a bond, with or without sureties, the Magistrate shall make an order accordingly: Provided that— 40 (a) no person shall be ordered to give security of a nature different from, or of an amount larger than, or for a period longer than, that specified in the order made under section 130; (b) the amount of every bond shall be fixed with due regard to the circumstances of the case and shall not be excessive; 45 (c) when the person in respect of whom the inquiry is made is a minor, the bond shall be executed only by his sureties. 137. If, on an inquiry under section 135, it is not proved that it is necessary for Discharge of keeping the peace or maintaining good behaviour, as the case may be, that the person in person informed respect of whom the inquiry is made, should execute a bond, the Magistrate shall make an against. entry on the record to that effect, and if such person is in custody only for the purposes of the inquiry, shall release him, or, if such person is not in custody, shall discharge him. Commencement 138. (1) If any person, in respect of whom an order requiring security is made under of period for section 125 or section 136, is at the time such order is made, sentenced to, or undergoing a which security sentence of, imprisonment, the period for which such security is required shall commence 5 is required. on the expiration of such sentence. (2) In other cases such period shall commence on the date of such order unless the Magistrate, for sufficient reason, fixes a later date. Contents of 139. The bond to be executed by any such person shall bind him to keep the peace or bond. to be of good behaviour, as the case may be, and in the latter case the commission or 10 attempt to commit, or the abetment of, any offence punishable with imprisonment, wherever it may be committed, is a breach of the bond. Power to 140. (1) A Magistrate may refuse to accept any surety offered, or may reject any reject sureties. surety previously accepted by him or his predecessor under this Chapter on the ground that such surety is an unfit person for the purposes of the bond: 15 Provided that before so refusing to accept or rejecting any such surety, he shall either himself hold an inquiry on oath into the fitness of the surety, or cause such inquiry to be held and a report to be made thereon by a Magistrate subordinate to him. (2) Such Magistrate shall, before holding the inquiry, give reasonable notice to the surety and to the person by whom the surety was offered and shall, in making the inquiry, 20 record the substance of the evidence adduced before him. (3) If the Magistrate is satisfied, after considering the evidence so adduced either before him or before a Magistrate deputed under sub-section (1), and the report of such Magistrate (if any), that the surety is an unfit person for the purposes of the bond, he shall make an order refusing to accept or rejecting, as the case may be, such surety and recording 25 his reasons for so doing: Provided that before making an order rejecting any surety who has previously been accepted, the Magistrate shall issue his summons or warrant, as he thinks fit, and cause the person for whom the surety is bound to appear or to be brought before him. Imprisonment 141. (1) (a) If any person ordered to give security under section 127 or section 136 30 in default of does not give such security on or before the date on which the period for which such security. security is to be given commences, he shall, except in the case next hereinafter mentioned, be committed to prison, or, if he is already in prison, be detained in prison until such period expires or until within such period he gives the security to the Court or Magistrate who made the order requiring it. 35 (b) If any person after having executed a bond, with or without sureties without sureties for keeping the peace in pursuance of an order of a Magistrate under section 136, is proved, to the satisfaction of such Magistrate or his successor-in-office, to have committed breach of the bond, such Magistrate or successor-in-office may, after recording the grounds of such proof, order that the person be arrested and detained in prison until the expiry of the 40 period of the bond and such order shall be without prejudice to any other punishment or forfeiture to which the said person may be liable in accordance with law. (2) When such person has been ordered by a Magistrate to give security for a period exceeding one year, such Magistrate shall, if such person does not give such security as aforesaid, issue a warrant directing him to be detained in prison pending the orders of the 45 Sessions Judge and the proceedings shall be laid, as soon as conveniently may be, before such Court. (3) Such Court, after examining such proceedings and requiring from the Magistrate any further information or evidence which it thinks necessary, and after giving the concerned person a reasonable opportunity of being heard, may pass such order on the case as it thinks fit: Provided that the period (if any) for which any person is imprisoned for failure to give security shall not exceed three years. 5 (4) If security has been required in the course of the same proceeding from two or more persons in respect of any one of whom the proceedings are referred to the Sessions Judge under sub-section (2) such reference shall also include the case of any other of such persons who has been ordered to give security, and the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) shall, in that event, apply to the case of such other person also, except that the period (if 10 any) for which he may be imprisoned, shall not exceed the period for which he was ordered to give security. (5) A Sessions Judge may in his discretion transfer any proceedings laid before him under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) to an Additional Sessions Judge and upon such transfer, such Additional Sessions Judge may exercise the powers of a Sessions Judge 15 under this section in respect of such proceedings. (6) If the security is tendered to the officer in charge of the jail, he shall forthwith refer the matter to the Court or Magistrate who made the order, and shall await the orders of such Court or Magistrate. (7) Imprisonment for failure to give security for keeping the peace shall be simple. 20 (8) Imprisonment for failure to give security for good behaviour shall, where the proceedings have been taken under section 127, be simple, and, where the proceedings have been taken under section 128 or section 129, be rigorous or simple as the Court or Magistrate in each case directs. 142. (1) Whenever the District Magistrate in the case of an order passed by an Power to 25 Executive Magistrate under section 136, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case release is of opinion that any person imprisoned for failing to give security under this Chapter may persons imprisoned for be released without hazard to the community or to any other person, he may order such failing to give person to be discharged. security. (2) Whenever any person has been imprisoned for failing to give security under this 30 Chapter, the High Court or Court of Session, or, where the order was made by any other Court, District Magistrate, in the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 136, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case, may make an order reducing the amount of the security or the number of sureties or the time for which security has been required. 35 (3) An order under sub-section (1) may direct the discharge of such person either without conditions or upon any conditions which such person accepts: Provided that any condition imposed shall cease to be operative when the period for which such person was ordered to give security has expired. (4) The State Government may prescribe the conditions upon which a conditional 40 discharge may be made. (5) If any condition upon which any person has been discharged is, in the opinion of District Magistrate, in the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 136, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case by whom the order of discharge was made or of his successor, not fulfilled, he may cancel the same. 45 (6) When a conditional order of discharge has been cancelled under sub-section (5), such person may be arrested by any police officer without warrant, and shall thereupon be produced before the District Magistrate, in the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 136, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case. (7) Unless such person gives security in accordance with the terms of the original order for the unexpired portion of the term for which he was in the first instance committed or ordered to be detained (such portion being deemed to be a period equal to the period between the date of the breach of the conditions of discharge and the date on which, except for such conditional discharge, he would have been entitled to release), District Magistrate, 5 in the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 136, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case may remand such person to prison to undergo such unexpired portion. (8) A person remanded to prison under sub-section (7) shall, subject to the provisions of section 141, be released at any time on giving security in accordance with the terms of the 10 original order for the unexpired portion aforesaid to the Court or Magistrate by whom such order was made, or to its or his successor. (9) The High Court or Court of Session may at any time, for sufficient reasons to be recorded in writing, cancel any bond for keeping the peace or for good behaviour executed under this Chapter by any order made by it, and District Magistrate, in the case of an order 15 passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 136, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case may make such cancellation where such bond was executed under his order or under the order of any other Court in his district. (10) Any surety for the peaceable conduct or good behaviour of another person ordered to execute a bond under this Chapter may at any time apply to the Court making 20 such order to cancel the bond and on such application being made, the Court shall issue a summons or warrant, as it thinks fit, requiring the person for whom such surety is bound to appear or to be brought before it. Security for 143. (1) When a person for whose appearance a summons or warrant has been issued unexpired under the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 140 or under sub-section (10) of section 142, 25 period of appears or is brought before the Magistrate or Court, the Magistrate or Court shall cancel bond. the bond executed by such person and shall order such person to give, for the unexpired portion of the term of such bond, fresh security of the same description as the original security. (2) Every such order shall, for the purposes of sections 139 to 142 (both inclusive) be deemed to be an order made under section 125 or section 136, as the case may be. 30 CHAPTER X ORDER FOR MAINTENANCE OF WIVES, CHILDREN AND PARENTS Order for 144. (1) If any person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain— maintenance of wives, (a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or children and parents. (b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether married or not, unable to 35 maintain itself, or (c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married daughter) who has attained majority, where such child is, by reason of any physical or mental abnormality or injury unable to maintain itself, or (d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself, a Judicial Magistrate 40 of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother, at such monthly rate as such Magistrate thinks fit and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct: Provided that the Judicial Magistrate may order the father of a minor female child 45 referred to in clause (b) to make such allowance, until she attains her majority, if the Judicial Magistrate is satisfied that the husband of such minor female child, if married, is not possessed of sufficient means: Provided further that the Judicial Magistrate may, during the pendency of the proceeding regarding monthly allowance for the maintenance under this sub-section, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the interim maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother, and the expenses of such proceeding which the Judicial Magistrate 5 considers reasonable, and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct: Provided also that an application for the monthly allowance for the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding under the second proviso shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of the service of notice of the application to such person. 10 Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter,— (a) "minor" means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority 9 of 1875. Act, 1875 is deemed not to have attained his majority; (b) "wife" includes a woman who has been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce from, her husband and has not remarried. 15 (2) Any such allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding shall be payable from the date of the order, or, if so ordered, from the date of the application for maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be. (3) If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause to comply with the order, 20 any such Magistrate may, for every breach of the order, issue a warrant for levying the amount due in the manner provided for levying fines, and may sentence such person, for the whole or any part of each month's allowance for the maintenance or the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be, remaining unpaid after the execution of the warrant, to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or until 25 payment if sooner made: Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any amount due under this section unless application be made to the Court to levy such amount within a period of one year from the date on which it became due: Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wife on condition of her 30 living with him, and she refuses to live with him, such Magistrate may consider any grounds of refusal stated by her, and may make an order under this section notwithstanding such offer, if he is satisfied that there is just ground for so doing. Explanation.—If a husband has contracted marriage with another woman or keeps a mistress, it shall be considered to be just ground for his wife's refusal to live with him. 35 (4) No wife shall be entitled to receive an allowance for the maintenance or the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, from her husband under this section if she is living in adultery, or if, without any sufficient reason, she refuses to live with her husband, or if they are living separately by mutual consent. (5) On proof that any wife in whose favour an order has been made under this section 40 is living in adultery, or that without sufficient reason she refuses to live with her husband, or that they are living separately by mutual consent, the Judicial Magistrate shall cancel the order. 145. (1) Proceedings under section 144 may be taken against any person in any Procedure. district— 45 (a) where he is, or (b) where he or his wife resides, or (c) where he last resided with his wife, or as the case may be, with the mother of the illegitimate child. (2) All evidence in such proceedings shall be taken in the presence of the person against whom an order for payment of maintenance is proposed to be made, or, when his personal attendance is dispensed with, in the presence of his pleader, and shall be recorded in the manner prescribed for summons-cases: Provided that if the Judicial Magistrate is satisfied that the person against whom an 5 order for payment of maintenance is proposed to be made is wilfully avoiding service, or wilfully neglecting to attend the Court, the Magistrate may proceed to hear and determine the case ex parte and any order so made may be set aside for good cause shown on an application made within three months from the date thereof subject to such terms including terms as to payment of costs to the opposite party as the Magistrate may think just and 10 proper. (3) The Court in dealing with applications under section 144 shall have power to make such order as to costs as may be just. Alteration in 146. (1) On proof of a change in the circumstances of any person, receiving, under allowance. section 144 a monthly allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance, or ordered 15 under the same section to pay a monthly allowance for the maintenance, or interim maintenance, to his wife, child, father or mother, as the case may be, the Magistrate may make such alteration, as he thinks fit, in the allowance for the maintenance or the interim maintenance, as the case may be. (2) Where it appears to the Judicial Magistrate that in consequence of any decision of 20 a competent Civil Court, any order made under section 144 should be cancelled or varied, he shall cancel the order or, as the case may be, vary the same accordingly. (3) Where any order has been made under section 144 in favour of a woman who has been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce from, her husband, the Judicial Magistrate shall, if he is satisfied that— 25 (a) the woman has, after the date of such divorce, remarried, cancel such order as from the date of her remarriage; (b) the woman has been divorced by her husband and that she has received, whether before or after the date of the said order, the whole of the sum which, under any customary or personal law applicable to the parties, was payable on such divorce, 30 cancel such order,— (i) in the case where such sum was paid before such order, from the date on which such order was made; (ii) in any other case, from the date of expiry of the period, if any, for which maintenance has been actually paid by the husband to the woman; 35 (c) the woman has obtained a divorce from her husband and that she had voluntarily surrendered her rights to maintenance or interim maintenance, as the case may be, after her divorce, cancel the order from the date thereof. (4) At the time of making any decree for the recovery of any maintenance or dowry by any person, to whom a monthly allowance for the maintenance and interim maintenance or 40 any of them has been ordered to be paid under section 144, the Civil Court shall take into account the sum which has been paid to, or recovered by, such person as monthly allowance for the maintenance and interim maintenance or any of them, as the case may be, in pursuance of the said order. Enforcement 147. A copy of the order of maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of 45 of order of proceedings, as the case may be, shall be given without payment to the person in whose maintenance. favour it is made, or to his guardian, if any, or to the person to whom the allowance for the maintenance or the allowance for the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be, is to be paid; and such order may be enforced by any Judicial Magistrate in any place where the person against whom it is made may be, on such Magistrate being satisfied as to the identity of the parties and the non-payment of the allowance, or as the case may be, expenses, due. CHAPTER XI 5 MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND TRANQUILLITY A.—Unlawful assemblies 148. (1) Any Executive Magistrate or officer in charge of a police station or, in the Dispersal of absence of such officer in charge, any police officer, not below the rank of a sub-inspector, assembly by use of civil may command any unlawful assembly, or any assembly of five or more persons likely to force. 10 cause a disturbance of the public peace, to disperse; and it shall thereupon be the duty of the members of such assembly to disperse accordingly. (2) If, upon being so commanded, any such assembly does not disperse, or if, without being so commanded, it conducts itself in such a manner as to show a determination not to disperse, any Executive Magistrate or police officer referred to in sub-section (1), may 15 proceed to disperse such assembly by force, and may require the assistance of any person, not being an officer or member of the armed forces and acting as such, for the purpose of dispersing such assembly, and, if necessary, arresting and confining the persons who form part of it, in order to disperse such assembly or that they may be punished according to law. 149. (1) If any assembly referred to in sub-section (1) of section 148 cannot otherwise Use of armed 20 be dispersed, and it is necessary for the public security that it should be dispersed, the forces to disperse District Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate authorised by him, who is present, assembly. may cause it to be dispersed by the armed forces. (2) Such Magistrate may require any officer in command of any group of persons belonging to the armed forces to disperse the assembly with the help of the armed forces 25 under his command, and to arrest and confine such persons forming part of it as the Executive Magistrate may direct, or as it may be necessary to arrest and confine in order to disperse the assembly or to have them punished according to law. (3) Every such officer of the armed forces shall obey such requisition in such manner as he thinks fit, but in so doing he shall use as little force, and do as little injury to person 30 and property, as may be consistent with dispersing the assembly and arresting and detaining such persons. 150. When the public security is manifestly endangered by any such assembly and Power of no Executive Magistrate can be communicated with, any commissioned or gazetted officer certain armed force officers of the armed forces may disperse such assembly with the help of the armed forces under his to disperse 35 command, and may arrest and confine any persons forming part of it, in order to disperse assembly. such assembly or that they may be punished according to law; but if, while he is acting under this section, it becomes practicable for him to communicate with an Executive Magistrate, he shall do so, and shall thenceforward obey the instructions of the Magistrate, as to whether he shall or shall not continue such action. 40 151. (1) No prosecution against any person for any act purporting to be done under Protection section 148, section 149 or section 150 shall be instituted in any Criminal Court except— against prosecution (a) with the sanction of the Central Government where such person is an officer for acts done or member of the armed forces; under sections 148, 149 and (b) with the sanction of the State Government in any other case. 150. 45 (2) (a) No Executive Magistrate or police officer acting under any of the said sections in good faith; (b) no person doing any act in good faith in compliance with a requisition under section 148 or section 149; (c) no officer of the armed forces acting under section 150 in good faith; (d) no member of the armed forces doing any act in obedience to any order which he was bound to obey, shall be deemed to have thereby committed an offence: Provided that no case shall be registered under sub-section (1) of section 174 against 5 any officer or member of the armed forces for any act done by him in obedience of any order which he was bound to obey in the discharge of his official duties, without making a preliminary enquiry into the matter: Provided further that no officer or member of the armed forces of the Union or any police officer of a State shall be arrested for anything done or purported to be done by him 10 in obedience of any order which he was bound to obey in the discharge of his official duties, except after obtaining the consent of the Central Government or the State Government. (3) In this section and in the preceding sections of this Chapter,— (a) the expression "armed forces" means the military, naval and air forces, operating as land forces and includes any other armed forces of the Union so operating; 15 (b) "officer", in relation to the armed forces, means a person commissioned, gazetted or in pay as an officer of the armed forces and includes a junior commissioned officer, a warrant officer, a petty officer, a non-commissioned officer and a non-gazetted officer; (c) "member", in relation to the armed forces, means a person in the armed 20 forces other than an officer. B.—Public nuisances Conditional 152. (1) Whenever a District Magistrate or a Sub-divisional Magistrate or any other order for Executive Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf by the State Government, on removal of nuisance. receiving the report of a police officer or other information and on taking such evidence (if 25 any) as he thinks fit, considers— (a) that any unlawful obstruction or nuisance should be removed from any public place or from any way, river or channel which is or may be lawfully used by the public; or (b) that the conduct of any trade or occupation, or the keeping of any goods or 30 merchandise, is injurious to the health or physical comfort of the community, and that in consequence such trade or occupation should be prohibited or regulated or such goods or merchandise should be removed or the keeping thereof regulated; or (c) that the construction of any building, or, the disposal of any substance, as is likely to occasion configuration or explosion, should be prevented or stopped; or 35 (d) that any building, tent or structure, or any tree is in such a condition that it is likely to fall and thereby cause injury to persons living or carrying on business in the neighbourhood or passing by, and that in consequence the removal, repair or support of such building, tent or structure, or the removal or support of such tree, is necessary; or 40 (e) that any tank, well or excavation adjacent to any such way or public place should be fenced in such manner as to prevent danger arising to the public; or (f) that any dangerous animal should be destroyed, confined or otherwise disposed of, such Magistrate may make a conditional order requiring the person causing such obstruction or nuisance, or carrying on such trade or occupation, or 45 keeping any such goods or merchandise, or owning, possessing or controlling such building, tent, structure, substance, tank, well or excavation, or owning or possessing such animal or tree, within a time to be fixed in the order— (i) to remove such obstruction or nuisance; or (ii) to desist from carrying on, or to remove or regulate in such manner as 5 may be directed, such trade or occupation, or to remove such goods or merchandise, or to regulate the keeping thereof in such manner as may be directed; or (iii) to prevent or stop the construction of such building, or to alter the disposal of such substance; or 10 (iv) to remove, repair or support such building, tent or structure, or to remove or support such trees; or (v) to fence such tank, well or excavation; or (vi) to destroy, confine or dispose of such dangerous animal in the manner provided in the said order, 15 or, if he objects so to do, to appear before himself or some other Executive Magistrate subordinate to him at a time and place to be fixed by the order, and show cause, in the manner hereinafter provided, why the order should not be made absolute. (2) No order duly made by a Magistrate under this section shall be called in question in any Civil Court. 20 Explanation.—A "public place" includes also property belonging to the State, camping grounds and grounds left unoccupied for sanitary or recreative purposes. 153. (1) The order shall, if practicable, be served on the person against whom it is Service or made, in the manner herein provided for service of summons. notification of order. (2) If such order cannot be so served, it shall be notified by proclamation or by 25 electronic communication in such manner as the State Government may, by rules, direct, and a copy thereof shall be stuck up at such place or places as may be fittest for conveying the information to such person. 154. The person against whom such order is made shall— Person to whom order is (a) perform, within the time and in the manner specified in the order, the act addressed to 30 directed thereby; or obey or show cause. (b) appear in accordance with such order and show cause against the same; and such appearance or hearing may be permitted through audio video conferencing. 155. If the person against whom an order is made under section 154 does not perform Penalty for such act or appear and show cause, he shall be liable to the penalty specified in that behalf failure to comply with 35 in section 221 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and the order shall be made absolute. section 154. 156. (1) Where an order is made under section 152 for the purpose of preventing Procedure obstruction, nuisance or danger to the public in the use of any way, river, channel or place, where the Magistrate shall, on the appearance before him of the person against whom the order existence of public right is was made, question him as to whether he denies the existence of any public right in respect denied. 40 of the way, river, channel or place, and if he does so, the Magistrate shall, before proceeding under section 157, inquire into the matter. (2) If in such inquiry the Magistrate finds that there is any reliable evidence in support of such denial, he shall stay the proceedings until the matter of the existence of such right has been decided by a competent Court; and, if he finds that there is no such evidence, he 45 shall proceed as laid down in section 157. (3) A person who has, on being questioned by the Magistrate under sub-section (1), fail to deny the existence of a public right of the nature therein referred to, or who, having made such denial, has failed to adduce reliable evidence in support thereof, shall not in the subsequent proceedings be permitted to make any such denial. Procedure 157. (1) If the person against whom an order under section 152 is made appears and where the shows cause against the order, the Magistrate shall take evidence in the matter as in a 5 person against summons-case. whom order is made under (2) If the Magistrate is satisfied that the order, either as originally made or subject to section 152 such modification as he considers necessary, is reasonable and proper, the order shall be appears to show cause. made absolute without modification or, as the case may be, with such modification. (3) If the Magistrate is not so satisfied, no further proceedings shall be taken in the 10 case: Provided that the proceedings under this section shall be completed, as soon as possible, within a period of ninety days, which may be extended for the reasons to be recorded in writing, to one hundred and twenty days. Power of 158. The Magistrate may, for the purposes of an inquiry under section 156 or 15 Magistrate to section 157— direct local investigation (a) direct a local investigation to be made by such person as he thinks fit; or and examination (b) summon and examine an expert. of an expert. Power of 159. (1) Where the Magistrate directs a local investigation by any person under Magistrate to section 158, the Magistrate may— 20 furnish written instructions, (a) furnish such person with such written instructions as may seem necessary etc. for his guidance; (b) declare by whom the whole or any part of the necessary expenses of the local investigation shall be paid. (2) The report of such person may be read as evidence in the case. 25 (3) Where the Magistrate summons and examines an expert under section 158, the Magistrate may direct by whom the costs of such summoning and examination shall be paid. Procedure on 160. (1) When an order has been made absolute under section 155 or section 157, the order being Magistrate shall give notice of the same to the person against whom the order was made, 30 made absolute and shall further require him to perform the act directed by the order within the time to be and fixed in the notice, and inform him that, in case of disobedience, he shall be liable to the consequences of penalty provided by section 221 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. disobedience. (2) If such act is not performed within the time fixed, the Magistrate may cause it to be performed, and may recover the cost of performing it, either by the sale of any building, 35 goods or other property removed by his order, or by the distress and sale of any other movable property of such person within or without such Magistrate's local jurisdiction, and if such other property is without such jurisdiction, the order shall authorise its attachment and sale when endorsed by the Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the property to be attached is found. 40 (3) No suit shall lie in respect of anything done in good faith under this section. Injunction 161. (1) If a Magistrate making an order under section 152 considers that immediate pending measures should be taken to prevent imminent danger or injury of a serious kind to the inquiry. public, he may issue such an injunction to the person against whom the order was made, as is required to obviate or prevent such danger or injury pending the determination of the 45 matter. (2) In default of such person forthwith obeying such injunction, the Magistrate may himself use, or cause to be used, such means as he thinks fit to obviate such danger or to prevent such injury. (3) No suit shall lie in respect of anything done in good faith by a Magistrate under 5 this section. 162. A District Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate, or any other Executive Magistrate Magistrate or Deputy Commissioner of Police empowered by the State Government or the may prohibit repetition or District Magistrate in this behalf, may order any person not to repeat or continue a public continuance nuisance, as defined in the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, or any special or local law. of public 10 C.—Urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger nuisance. 163. (1) In cases where, in the opinion of a District Magistrate, a Sub-divisional Power to issue Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate specially empowered by the State Government order in urgent cases of in this behalf, there is sufficient ground for proceeding under this section and immediate nuisance or prevention or speedy remedy is desirable, such Magistrate may, by a written order stating apprehended 15 the material facts of the case and served in the manner provided by section 153, direct any danger. person to abstain from a certain act or to take certain order with respect to certain property in his possession or under his management, if such Magistrate considers that such direction is likely to prevent, or tends to prevent, obstruction, annoyance or injury to any person lawfully employed, or danger to human life, health or safety or a disturbance of the public 20 tranquility, or a riot, or an affray. (2) An order under this section may, in cases of emergency or in cases where the circumstances do not admit of the serving in due time of a notice upon the person against whom the order is directed, be passed ex parte. (3) An order under this section may be directed to a particular individual, or to persons 25 residing in a particular place or area, or to the public generally when frequenting or visiting a particular place or area. (4) No order under this section shall remain in force for more than two months from the making thereof: Provided that if the State Government considers it necessary so to do for preventing 30 danger to human life, health or safety or for preventing a riot or any affray, it may, by notification, direct that an order made by a Magistrate under this section shall remain in force for such further period not exceeding six months from the date on which the order made by the Magistrate would have, but for such order, expired, as it may specify in the said notification. 35 (5) Any Magistrate may, either on his own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, rescind or alter any order made under this section by himself or any Magistrate subordinate to him or by his predecessor-in-office. (6) The State Government may, either on its own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, rescind or alter any order made by it under the proviso to sub-section (4). 40 (7) Where an application under sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) is received, the Magistrate, or the State Government, as the case may be, shall afford to the applicant an early opportunity of appearing before him or it, either in person or by pleader and showing cause against the order; and if the Magistrate or the State Government, as the case may be, rejects the application wholly or in part, he or it shall record in writing the reasons for so 45 doing. D.—Disputes as to immovable property 164. (1) Whenever an Executive Magistrate is satisfied from a report of a police Procedure officer or upon other information that a dispute likely to cause a breach of the peace exists where dispute concerning concerning any land or water or the boundaries thereof, within his local jurisdiction, he land or water 50 shall make an order in writing, stating the grounds of his being so satisfied, and requiring is likely to the parties concerned in such dispute to attend his Court in person or by pleader, on a cause breach of peace. specified date and time, and to put in written statements of their respective claims as respects the fact of actual possession of the subject of dispute. (2) For the purposes of this section, the expression "land or water" includes buildings, markets, fisheries, crops or other produce of land, and the rents or profits of any such property. 5 (3) A copy of the order shall be served in the manner provided by this Sanhita for the service of summons upon such person or persons as the Magistrate may direct, and at least one copy shall be published by being affixed to some conspicuous place at or near the subject of dispute. (4) The Magistrate shall, without reference to the merits or the claims of any of the 10 parties to a right to possess the subject of dispute, peruse the statements so put in, hear the parties, receive all such evidence as may be produced by them, take such further evidence, if any, as he thinks necessary, and, if possible, decide whether any and which of the parties was, at the date of the order made by him under sub-section (1), in possession of the subject of dispute: 15 Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that any party has been forcibly and wrongfully dispossessed within two months next before the date on which the report of a police officer or other information was received by the Magistrate, or after that date and before the date of his order under sub-section (1), he may treat the party so dispossessed as if that party had been in possession on the date of his order under sub-section (1). 20 (5) Nothing in this section shall preclude any party so required to attend, or any other person interested, from showing that no such dispute as aforesaid exists or has existed; and in such case the Magistrate shall cancel his said order, and all further proceedings thereon shall be stayed, but, subject to such cancellation, the order of the Magistrate under sub-section (1) shall be final. 25 (6) (a) If the Magistrate decides that one of the parties was, or should under the proviso to sub-section (4) be treated as being, in such possession of the said subject of dispute, he shall issue an order declaring such party to be entitled to possession thereof until evicted therefrom in due course of law, and forbidding all disturbance of such possession until such eviction; and when he proceeds under the proviso to sub-section (4), may 30 restore to possession the party forcibly and wrongfully dispossessed. (b) The order made under this sub-section shall be served and published in the manner laid down in sub-section (3). (7) When any party to any such proceeding dies, the Magistrate may cause the legal representative of the deceased party to be made a party to the proceeding and shall thereupon 35 continue the inquiry, and if any question arises as to who the legal representative of a deceased party for the purposes of such proceeding is, all persons claiming to be representatives of the deceased party shall be made parties thereto. (8) If the Magistrate is of opinion that any crop or other produce of the property, the subject of dispute in a proceeding under this section pending before him, is subject to 40 speedy and natural decay, he may make an order for the proper custody or sale of such property, and, upon the completion of the inquiry, shall make such order for the disposal of such property, or the sale-proceeds thereof, as he thinks fit. (9) The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, at any stage of the proceedings under this section, on the application of either party, issue a summons to any witness directing him to 45 attend or to produce any document or thing. (10) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to be in derogation of powers of the Magistrate to proceed under section 126. 165. (1) If the Magistrate at any time after making the order under sub-section (1) of Power to section 164 considers the case to be one of emergency, or if he decides that none of the attach subject of dispute and parties was then in such possession as is referred to in section 164, or if he is unable to to appoint satisfy himself as to which of them was then in such possession of the subject of dispute, receiver. 5 he may attach the subject of dispute until a competent Court has determined the rights of the parties thereto with regard to the person entitled to the possession thereof: Provided that such Magistrate may withdraw the attachment at any time if he is satisfied that there is no longer any likelihood of breach of the peace with regard to the subject of dispute. 10 (2) When the Magistrate attaches the subject of dispute, he may, if no receiver in relation to such subject of dispute has been appointed by any Civil Court, make such arrangements as he considers proper for looking after the property or if he thinks fit, appoint a receiver thereof, who shall have, subject to the control of the Magistrate, all the 5 of 1908. powers of a receiver appointed under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908: 15 Provided that in the event of a receiver being subsequently appointed in relation to the subject of dispute by any Civil Court, the Magistrate— (a) shall order the receiver appointed by him to hand over the possession of the subject of dispute to the receiver appointed by the Civil Court and shall thereafter discharge the receiver appointed by him; 20 (b) may make such other incidental or consequential orders as may be just. 166. (1) Whenever an Executive Magistrate is satisfied from the report of a police Dispute officer or upon other information, that a dispute likely to cause a breach of the peace exists concerning regarding any alleged right of user of any land or water within his local jurisdiction, whether right of use of land or water. such right be claimed as an easement or otherwise, he shall make an order in writing, stating 25 the grounds of his being so satisfied and requiring the parties concerned in such dispute to attend his Court in person or by pleader on a specified date and time and to put in written statements of their respective claims. Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression "land or water" has the meaning given to it in sub-section (2) of section 164. 30 (2) The Magistrate shall peruse the statements so put in, under sub-section (1), hear the parties, receive all such evidence as may be produced by them respectively, consider the effect of such evidence, take such further evidence, if any, as he thinks necessary and, if possible, decide whether such right exists; and the provisions of section 164 shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of such inquiry. 35 (3) If it appears to such Magistrate that such rights exist, he may make an order prohibiting any interference with the exercise of such right, including, in a proper case, an order for the removal of any obstruction in the exercise of any such right: Provided that no such order shall be made where the right is exercisable at all times of the year, unless such right has been exercised within three months next before the receipt 40 under sub-section (1) of the report of a police officer or other information leading to the institution of the inquiry, or where the right is exercisable only at particular season or on particular occasion, unless the right has been exercised during the last of such seasons or on the last of such occasions before such receipt. (4) When in any proceedings commenced under sub-section (1) of section 164 the 45 Magistrate finds that the dispute is as regards an alleged right of user of land or water, he may, after recording his reasons, continue with the proceedings as if they had been commenced under sub-section (1), and when in any proceedings commenced under sub-section (1) the Magistrate finds that the dispute should be dealt with under section 164, he may, after recording his reasons, continue with the proceedings as if they had been 50 commenced under sub-section (1) of section 164. Local inquiry. 167. (1) Whenever a local inquiry is necessary for the purposes of section 164, section 165 or section 166, a District Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate may depute any Magistrate subordinate to him to make the inquiry, and may furnish him with such written instructions as may seem necessary for his guidance, and may declare by whom the whole or any part of the necessary expenses of the inquiry shall be paid. 5 (2) The report of the person so deputed may be read as evidence in the case. (3) When any costs have been incurred by any party to a proceeding under section 164, section 165 or section 166, the Magistrate passing a decision may direct by whom such costs shall be paid, whether by such party or by any other party to the proceeding, and whether in whole or in part or proportion and such costs may include any expenses 10 incurred in respect of witnesses and of pleaders' fees, which the Court may consider reasonable. CHAPTER XII PREVENTIVE ACTION OF THE POLICE Police to 168. Every police officer may interpose for the purpose of preventing, and shall, to prevent cognizable the best of his ability, prevent, the commission of any cognizable offence. 15 offences. Information 169. Every police officer receiving information of a design to commit any cognizable of design to offence shall communicate such information to the police officer to whom he is subordinate, commit and to any other officer whose duty it is to prevent or take cognizance of the commission of cognizable any such offence. offences. Arrest to 170. (1) A police officer knowing of a design to commit any cognizable offence may 20 prevent arrest, without orders from a Judicial Magistrate and without a warrant, the person so commission of designing, if it appears to such officer that the commission of the offence cannot be otherwise cognizable prevented. offences. (2) No person arrested under sub-section (1) shall be detained in custody for a period exceeding twenty-four hours from the time of his arrest unless his further detention is 25 required or authorised under any other provisions of this Sanhita or of any other law for the time being in force. Prevention of 171. A police officer may of his own authority interpose to prevent any injury attempted injury to to be committed in his view to any public property, movable or immovable, or the removal or public injury of any public landmark, buoy or other mark used for navigation. 30 property. Persons bound 172. (1) All persons shall be bound to conform to the lawful directions of a police to conform to officer given in fulfilment of any of his duty under this Chapter. lawful directions of (2) A police officer may detain or remove any person resisting, refusing, ignoring or police. disregarding to conform to any direction given by him under sub-section (1) and may either take such person before a Judicial Magistrate or, in petty cases, release him when the 35 occasion is past. CHAPTER XIII INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO INVESTIGATE Information 173. (1) Every information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, in cognizable irrespective of the area where the offence is committed may be given orally or by electronic 40 cases. communication and if given to an officer in charge of a police station,— (i) orally, it shall be reduced to writing by him or under his direction, and be read over to the informant; and every such information, whether given in writing or reduced to writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it; (ii) by electronic communication, it shall be taken on record by him on being 45 signed within three days by the person giving it, and the substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by such officer in such form as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf: Provided that if the information is given by the woman against whom an offence under section 64, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70, section 73, section 74, 5 section 75, section 76, section 77, section 78 or section 122 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is alleged to have been committed or attempted, then such information shall be recorded, by a woman police officer or any woman officer: Provided further that— (a) in the event that the person against whom an offence under section 354, 10 section 67, section 68, sub-section (2) of section 69, sub-section (1) of section 70, section 71, section 74, section 75, section 76, section 77 or section 79 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is alleged to have been committed or attempted, is temporarily or permanently mentally or physically disabled, then such information shall be recorded by a police officer, at the residence of the person seeking to report such offence or at 15 a convenient place of such person's choice, in the presence of an interpreter or a special educator, as the case may be; (b) the recording of such information shall be videographed; (c) the police officer shall get the statement of the person recorded by a Judicial Magistrate under clause (a) of sub-section (6) of section 183 as soon as possible. 20 (2) A copy of the information as recorded under sub-section (1) shall be given forthwith, free of cost, to the informant or the victim. (3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 175, on receipt of information relating to the commission of any cognizable offence, which is made punishable for three years or more but less than seven years, the officer in-charge of the police station 25 may with the prior permission from an officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police, considering the nature and gravity of the offence,— (i) proceed to conduct preliminary enquiry to ascertain whether there exists a prima facie case for proceeding in the matter within a period of fourteen days; or (ii) proceed with investigation when there exists a prima facie case. 30 (4) Any person aggrieved by a refusal on the part of an officer in charge of a police station to record the information referred to in sub-section (1), may send the substance of such information, in writing and by post, to the Superintendent of Police concerned who, if satisfied that such information discloses the commission of a cognizable offence, shall either investigate the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by any police officer 35 subordinate to him, in the manner provided by this Sanhita, and such officer shall have all the powers of an officer in charge of the police station in relation to that offence failing which he may make an application under sub-section (3) of section 175 to the Magistrate. 174. (1) When information is given to an officer in charge of a police station of the Information commission within the limits of such station of a non-cognizable offence, he shall enter or as to non- 40 cause to be entered the substance of the information in a book to be kept by such officer in cognizable cases and such form as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf, and,— investigation of such cases. (i) refer the informant to the Magistrate; (ii) forward the daily diary report of all such cases fortnightly to the Magistrate. (2) No police officer shall investigate a non-cognizable case without the order of a 45 Magistrate having power to try such case or commit the case for trial. (3) Any police officer receiving such order may exercise the same powers in respect of the investigation (except the power to arrest without warrant) as an officer in charge of a police station may exercise in a cognizable case. (4) Where a case relates to two or more offences of which at least one is cognizable, the case shall be deemed to be a cognizable case, notwithstanding that the other offences are non-cognizable. Police 175. (1) Any officer in charge of a police station may, without the order of a Magistrate, officer's power investigate any cognizable case which a Court having jurisdiction over the local area within 5 to investigate the limits of such station would have power to inquire into or try under the provisions of cognizable Chapter XIV: case. Provided that considering the nature and gravity of the offence, the Superintendent of Police may either himself investigate or require the Deputy Superintendent of Police to investigate the offence. 10 (2) No proceeding of a police officer in any such case shall at any stage be called in question on the ground that the case was one which such officer was not empowered under this section to investigate. (3) Any Judicial Magistrate empowered under section 210 may, after considering the application made under clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 173 and submission made in 15 this regard by the police officer, order such an investigation as above-mentioned. (4) Any Judicial Magistrate empowered under section 210, may upon receiving a complaint against a public servant arising in course of the discharge of his official duties, take cognizance, subject to— (a) receiving a report containing facts and circumstances of the incident from 20 the officer superior to him; and (b) after consideration of the assertions made by the public servant as to the situation that led to the incident so alleged. Procedure for 176. (1) If, from information received or otherwise, an officer in charge of a police investigation. station has reason to suspect the commission of an offence which he is empowered under 25 section 175 to investigate, he shall forthwith send a report of the same to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of such offence upon a police report and shall proceed in person, or shall depute one of his subordinate officers not being below such rank as the State Government may, by general or special order, prescribe in this behalf, to proceed, to the spot, to investigate the facts and circumstances of the case, and, if necessary, to take 30 measures for the discovery and arrest of the offender: Provided that— (a) when information as to the commission of any such offence is given against any person by name and the case is not of a serious nature, the officer in charge of a police station need not proceed in person or depute a subordinate officer to make an 35 investigation on the spot; (b) if it appears to the officer in charge of a police station that there is no sufficient ground for entering on an investigation, he shall not investigate the case: Provided further that in relation to an offence of rape, the recording of statement of the victim shall be conducted at the residence of the victim or in the place of her choice and 40 as far as practicable by a woman police officer in the presence of her parents or guardian or near relatives or social worker of the locality: Provided also that statement made under this sub-section may also be recorded through any audio-video electronic means preferably cell phone. (2) In each of the cases mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) of the first proviso to 45 sub-section (1), the officer in charge of the police station shall state in his report the reasons for not fully complying with the requirements of that sub-section by him, and, forward the daily diary report fortnightly to the Magistrate and in the case mentioned in clause (b) of the said proviso, the officer shall also forthwith notify to the informant, if any, in such manner as may be prescribed. (3) On receipt of every information relating to the commission of an offence which is made punishable for seven years or more, the officer in charge of a police station shall, from 5 such date, as may be notified within a period of five years by the State Government in this regard, cause the forensics expert to visit the crimes scene to collect forensic evidence in the offence and also cause videography of the process on mobile phone or any other electronic device: Provided that where forensics facility is not available in respect of any such offence, 10 the State Government shall, until the facility in respect of that matter is developed or made in the State, notify the utilisation of such facility of any other State. 177. (1) Every report sent to a Magistrate under section 176 shall, if the State Report how Government so directs, be submitted through such superior officer of police as the State submitted. Government, by general or special order, appoints in that behalf. 15 (2) Such superior officer may give such instructions to the officer in charge of the police station as he thinks fit, and shall, after recording such instructions on such report, transmit the same without delay to the Magistrate. 178. The Magistrate, on receiving report under section 176, may direct an investigation, Power to hold or, if he thinks fit, at once proceed, or depute any Magistrate subordinate to him to proceed, investigation 20 to hold a preliminary inquiry into, or otherwise to dispose of, the case in the manner or preliminary inquiry. provided in this Sanhita. 179. (1) Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter may, by order Police in writing, require the attendance before himself of any person being within the limits of his officer's power own or any adjoining station who, from the information given or otherwise, appears to be to require attendance of 25 acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case; and such person shall attend as so witnesses. required: Provided that no male person under the age of fifteen years or above the age of sixty years or a woman or a mentally or physically disabled person or a person with acute illness shall be required to attend at any place other than the place in which such person resides: 30 Provided further that if such person is willing to attend the police station or at any other place within the limits of such police station, such person may be permitted so to do. (2) The State Government may, by rules made in this behalf, provide for the payment by the police officer of the reasonable expenses of every person, attending under sub-section (1) at any place other than his residence. 35 180. (1) Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter, or any police Examination officer not below such rank as the State Government may, by general or special order, of witnesses by police. prescribe in this behalf, acting on the requisition of such officer, may examine orally any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case. (2) Such person shall be bound to answer truly all questions relating to such case put 40 to him by such officer, other than questions the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture. (3) The police officer may reduce into writing any statement made to him in the course of an examination under this section; and if he does so, he shall make a separate and true record of the statement of each such person whose statement he records: 45 Provided that statement made under this sub-section may also be recorded by audio-video electronic means: Provided further that the statement of a woman against whom an offence under section 64, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70, section 71, section 73, section 74, section 75, section 76, section 77 or section 78 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is alleged to have been committed or attempted, shall be recorded, by a woman police officer or any woman officer. Statements to 181. (1) No statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of an police and use investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to writing, be signed by the person 5 thereof. making it; nor shall any such statement or any record thereof, whether in a police diary or otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, be used for any purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made: Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial 10 whose statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly proved, may be used by the accused, and with the permission of the Court, by the prosecution, to contradict such witness in the manner provided by section 148 of the Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023; and when any part of such statement is so used, any part thereof may also be used in the re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose 15 only of explaining any matter referred to in his cross-examination. (2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within the provisions of clause (1) of section 26 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023; or to affect the provisions of section 23 of that Adhiniyam. Explanation.— An omission to state a fact or circumstance in the statement referred 20 to in sub-section (1) may amount to contradiction if the same appears to be significant and otherwise relevant having regard to the context in which such omission occurs and whether any omission amounts to a contradiction in the particular context shall be a question of fact. No inducement 182. (1) No police officer or other person in authority shall offer or make, or cause to to be offered. be offered or made, any such inducement, threat or promise as is mentioned in section 22 of 25 the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023. (2) But no police officer or other person shall prevent, by any caution or otherwise, any person from making in the course of any investigation under this Chapter any statement which he may be disposed to make of his own free will: Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the provisions of sub-section (4) 30 of section 184. Recording of 183. (1) Any Judicial Magistrate of the District in which the information about confessions commission of any offence has been registered, may, whether or not he has jurisdiction in and the case, record any confession or statement made to him in the course of an investigation statements. under this Chapter or under any other law for the time being in force, or at any time afterwards 35 but before the commencement of the inquiry or trial: Provided that any confession or statement made under this sub-section may also be recorded in the presence of the advocate of the person accused of an offence: Provided further that no confession shall be recorded by a police officer on whom any power of a Magistrate has been conferred under any law for the time being in force. 40 (2) The Magistrate shall, before recording any such confession, explain to the person making it that he is not bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, it may be used as evidence against him; and the Magistrate shall not record any such confession unless, upon questioning the person making it, he has reason to believe that it is being made voluntarily. 45 (3) If at any time before the confession is recorded, the person appearing before the Magistrate states that he is not willing to make the confession, the Magistrate shall not authorise the detention of such person in police custody. (4) Any such confession shall be recorded in the manner provided in section 316 for recording the examination of an accused person and shall be signed by the person making the confession; and the Magistrate shall make a memorandum at the foot of such record to the following effect:— 5 "I have explained to (name) that he is not bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, any confession he may make may be used as evidence against him and I believe that this confession was voluntarily made. It was taken in my presence and hearing, and was read over to the person making it and admitted by him to be correct, and it contains a full and true account of the statement made by him. 10 (Signed) A. B. Magistrate." (5) Any statement (other than a confession) made under sub-section (1) shall be recorded in such manner hereinafter provided for the recording of evidence as is, in the opinion of the Judicial Magistrate, best fitted to the circumstances of the case; and the 15 Judicial Magistrate shall have power to administer oath to the person whose statement is so recorded. (6) (a) In cases punishable under section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70, section 71, section 73, section 74, section 75, section 76, section 77, sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 74, or section 78 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the Judicial 20 Magistrate shall record the statement of the person against whom such offence has been committed in the manner specified in sub-section (5), as soon as the commission of the offence is brought to the notice of the police: Provided that such statement shall, as far as practicable, be recorded by a woman Judicial Magistrate and in her absence by a male Judicial Magistrate in the presence of a 25 woman: Provided further that in cases relating to the offences punishable with imprisonment for ten years or more or imprisonment for life or with death, the Judicial Magistrate shall record the statement of the witness brought before him by the police officer: Provided also that if the person making the statement is temporarily or permanently 30 mentally or physically disabled, the Magistrate shall take the assistance of an interpreter or a special educator in recording the statement: Provided also that if the person making the statement is temporarily or permanently mentally or physically disabled, the statement made by the person, with the assistance of an interpreter or a special educator, shall be recorded through audio-video electronic means 35 preferably cell phone. (b) A statement recorded under clause (a) of a person, who is temporarily or permanently mentally or physically disabled, shall be considered a statement in lieu of examination-in-chief, as specified in section 142 of the Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 such that the maker of the statement can be cross-examined on such statement, without the 40 need for recording the same at the time of trial. (7) The Magistrate recording a confession or statement under this section shall forward it to the Magistrate by whom the case is to be inquired into or tried. 184. (1) Where, during the stage when an offence of committing rape or attempt to Medical commit rape is under investigation, it is proposed to get the person of the woman with examination 45 whom rape is alleged or attempted to have been committed or attempted, examined by a of the victim of rape. medical expert, such examination shall be conducted by a registered medical practitioner employed in a hospital run by the Government or a local authority and in the absence of such a practitioner, by any other registered medical practitioner, with the consent of such woman or of a person competent to give such consent on her behalf and such woman shall be sent to such registered medical practitioner within twenty-four hours from the time of receiving the information relating to the commission of such offence. (2) The registered medical practitioner, to whom such woman is sent, shall, without delay, examine her person and prepare a report of his examination giving the following particulars, namely:— 5 (i) the name and address of the woman and of the person by whom she was brought; (ii) the age of the woman; (iii) the description of material taken from the person of the woman for DNA profiling; 10 (iv) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the woman; (v) general mental condition of the woman; and (vi) other material particulars in reasonable detail. (3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at. (4) The report shall specifically record that the consent of the woman or of the person 15 competent to give such consent on her behalf to such examination had been obtained. (5) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall also be noted in the report. (6) The registered medical practitioner shall, within a period of seven days forward the report to the investigating officer who shall forward it to the Magistrate referred to in 20 section 193 as part of the documents referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (6) of that section. (7) Nothing in this section shall be construed as rendering lawful any examination without the consent of the woman or of any person competent to give such consent on her behalf. 25 Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "examination" and "registered medical practitioner" shall have the same meanings as respectively assigned to them in section 51. Search by 185. (1) Whenever an officer in charge of a police station or a police officer making an police officer. investigation has reasonable grounds for believing that anything necessary for the purposes 30 of an investigation into any offence which he is authorised to investigate may be found in any place within the limits of the police station of which he is in charge, or to which he is attached, and that such thing cannot in his opinion be otherwise obtained without undue delay, such officer may, after recording in writing the grounds of his belief in the case-diary and specifying in such writing, so far as possible, the thing for which search is to be made, 35 search, or cause search to be made, for such thing in any place within the limits of such station. (2) A police officer proceeding under sub-section (1), shall, if practicable, conduct the search in person. Provided that the search conducted under this section shall be recorded through 40 audio-video electronic means preferably by mobile phone. (3) If he is unable to conduct the search in person, and there is no other person competent to make the search present at the time, he may, after recording in writing his reasons for so doing, require any officer subordinate to him to make the search, and he shall deliver to such subordinate officer an order in writing, specifying the place to be searched, 45 and so far as possible, the thing for which search is to be made; and such subordinate officer may thereupon search for such thing in such place. (4) The provisions of this Sanhita as to search-warrants and the general provisions as to searches contained in section 103 shall, so far as may be, apply to a search made under this section. (5) Copies of any record made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) shall forthwith, 5 but not later than forty-eight hours, be sent to the nearest Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence, and the owner or occupier of the place searched shall, on application, be furnished, free of cost, with a copy of the same by the Magistrate. 186. (1) An officer in charge of a police station or a police officer not being below the When officer rank of sub-inspector making an investigation may require an officer in charge of another in charge of police station 10 police station, whether in the same or a different district, to cause a search to be made in any may require place, in any case in which the former officer might cause such search to be made, within the another to limits of his own station. issue search- warrant. (2) Such officer, on being so required, shall proceed according to the provisions of section 185, and shall forward the thing found, if any, to the officer at whose request the 15 search was made. (3) Whenever there is reason to believe that the delay occasioned by requiring an officer in charge of another police station to cause a search to be made under sub-section (1) might result in evidence of the commission of an offence being concealed or destroyed, it shall be lawful for an officer in charge of a police station or a police officer 20 making any investigation under this Chapter to search, or cause to be searched, any place in the limits of another police station in accordance with the provisions of section 185, as if such place were within the limits of his own police station. (4) Any officer conducting a search under sub-section (3) shall forthwith send notice of the search to the officer in charge of the police station within the limits of which such 25 place is situate, and shall also send with such notice a copy of the list (if any) prepared under section 103, and shall also send to the nearest Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence, copies of the records referred to in sub-sections (1) and (3) of section 185. (5) The owner or occupier of the place searched shall, on application, be furnished 30 free of cost with a copy of any record sent to the Magistrate under sub-section (4). 187. (1) Whenever any person is arrested and detained in custody, and it appears Procedure that the investigation cannot be completed within the period of twenty-four hours fixed by when section 58, and there are grounds for believing that the accusation or information is investigation cannot be well-founded, the officer in charge of the police station or the police officer making the completed in 35 investigation, if he is not below the rank of sub-inspector, shall forthwith transmit to the twenty-four nearest Judicial Magistrate a copy of the entries in the diary hereinafter specified relating to hours. the case, and shall at the same time forward the accused to such Magistrate. (2) The Judicial Magistrate to whom an accused person is forwarded under this section may, irrespective of whether he has or has no jurisdiction to try the case, after taking 40 into consideration the status of the accused person as to whether he is not released on bail or his bail has not been cancelled, authorise, from time to time, the detention of the accused in such custody as such Magistrate thinks fit, for a term not exceeding fifteen days in the whole, or in parts, at any time during the initial forty days or sixty days out of detention period of sixty days or ninety days, as the case may be, as provided in sub-section (3), and 45 if he has no jurisdiction to try the case or commit it for trial, and considers further detention unnecessary, he may order the accused to be forwarded to a Judicial Magistrate having such jurisdiction. (3) The Magistrate may authorise the detention of the accused person, beyond the period of fifteen days, if he is satisfied that adequate grounds exist for doing so, but no 50 Magistrate shall authorise the detention of the accused person in custody under this sub-section for a total period exceeding— (i) ninety days, where the investigation relates to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years; (ii) sixty days, where the investigation relates to any other offence, and, on the expiry of the said period of ninety days, or sixty days, as the case may be, the accused person shall be released on bail if he is prepared to and does furnish bail, and every 5 person released on bail under this sub-section shall be deemed to be so released under the provisions of Chapter XXXIV for the purposes of that Chapter. (4) No Magistrate shall authorise detention of the accused in custody of the police under this section unless the accused is produced before him in person for the first time and subsequently every time till the accused remains in the custody of the police, but the 10 Magistrate may extend further detention in judicial custody on production of the accused either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage. (5) No Magistrate of the second class, not specially empowered in this behalf by the High Court, shall authorise detention in the custody of the police. Explanation I.—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that, 15 notwithstanding the expiry of the period specified in sub-section (3), the accused shall be detained in custody so long as he does not furnish bail. Explanation II.—If any question arises whether an accused person was produced before the Magistrate as required under sub-section (4), the production of the accused person may be proved by his signature on the order authorising detention or by the order 20 certified by the Magistrate as to production of the accused person through the medium of electronic video linkage, as the case may be: Provided that in case of a woman under eighteen years of age, the detention shall be authorised to be in the custody of a remand home or recognised social institution: Provided further that no person shall be detained otherwise than in police station 25 under policy custody or in prison under Judicial custody or place declared as prison by the Central Government or the State Government. (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) to sub-section (5), the officer in charge of the police station or the police officer making the investigation, if he is not below the rank of a sub-inspector, may, where a Judicial Magistrate is not available, 30 transmit to the nearest Executive Magistrate, on whom the powers of a Judicial Magistrate have been conferred, a copy of the entry in the diary hereinafter specified relating to the case, and shall, at the same time, forward the accused to such Executive Magistrate, and thereupon such Executive Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, authorise the detention of the accused person in such custody as he may think fit for a term not 35 exceeding seven days in the aggregate; and, on the expiry of the period of detention so authorised, the accused person shall be released on bail except where an order for further detention of the accused person has been made by a Magistrate competent to make such order; and, where an order for such further detention is made, the period during which the accused person was detained in custody under the orders made by an Executive Magistrate 40 under this sub-section, shall be taken into account in computing the period specified in sub-section (3): Provided that before the expiry of the period aforesaid, the Executive Magistrate shall transmit to the nearest Judicial Magistrate the records of the case together with a copy of the entries in the diary relating to the case which was transmitted to him by the officer in 45 charge of the police station or the police officer making the investigation, as the case may be. (7) A Magistrate authorising under this section detention in the custody of the police shall record his reasons for so doing. (8) Any Magistrate other than the Chief Judicial Magistrate making such order shall forward a copy of his order, with his reasons for making it, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate. (9) If in any case triable by a Magistrate as a summons-case, the investigation is not concluded within a period of six months from the date on which the accused was arrested, 5 the Magistrate shall make an order stopping further investigation into the offence unless the officer making the investigation satisfies the Magistrate that for special reasons and in the interests of justice the continuation of the investigation beyond the period of six months is necessary. (10) Where any order stopping further investigation into an offence has been made 10 under sub-section (9), the Sessions Judge may, if he is satisfied, on an application made to him or otherwise, that further investigation into the offence ought to be made, vacate the order made under sub-section (9) and direct further investigation to be made into the offence subject to such directions with regard to bail and other matters as he may specify. 188. When any subordinate police officer has made any investigation under this Report of 15 Chapter, he shall report the result of such investigation to the officer in charge of the police investigation by subordinate station. police officer. 189. If, upon an investigation under this Chapter, it appears to the officer in charge of Release of the police station that there is not sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion to accused when evidence justify the forwarding of the accused to a Magistrate, such officer shall, if such person is in deficient. 20 custody, release him on his executing a bond, with or without sureties, as such officer may direct, to appear, if and when so required, before a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police report, and to try the accused or commit him for trial. 190. (1) If, upon an investigation under this Chapter, it appears to the officer in charge Cases to be of the police station that there is sufficient evidence or reasonable ground as aforesaid, sent to Magistrate, 25 such officer shall forward the accused under custody to a Judicial Magistrate empowered when evidence to take cognizance of the offence upon a police report to try the accused or commit him for is sufficient. trial, or, if the offence is bailable and the accused is able to give security, shall take security from him for his appearance before such Magistrate on a day fixed and for his attendance from day to day before such Magistrate until otherwise directed: 30 Provided that if the accused is not in custody, the police officer shall take security from such person for his appearance before the Judicial Magistrate and the Judicial Magistrate to whom such report is forwarded shall not refuse to accept the same on the ground that the accused is not taken in custody. (2) When the officer in charge of a police station forwards an accused person to a 35 Judicial Magistrate or takes security for his appearance before such Magistrate under this section, he shall send to such Magistrate any weapon or other article which it may be necessary to produce before him, and shall require the complainant (if any) and so many of the persons who appear to such officer to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case as he may think necessary, to execute a bond to appear before the Judicial 40 Magistrate as thereby directed and prosecute or give evidence (as the case may be) in the matter of the charge against the accused. (3) If the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate is mentioned in the bond, such Court shall be held to include any Court to which such Magistrate may refer the case for inquiry or trial, provided reasonable notice of such reference is given to such complainant or 45 persons. (4) The officer in whose presence the bond is executed shall deliver a copy thereof to one of the persons who executed it, and shall then send to the Magistrate the original with his report. Complainant 191. No complainant or witness on his way to any Court shall be required to accompany and witnesses a police officer, or shall be subjected to unnecessary restraint or inconvenience, or required not to be to give any security for his appearance other than his own bond: required to accompany Provided that if any complainant or witness refuses to attend or to execute a bond as police officer and not to be directed in section 190, the officer in charge of the police station may forward him in 5 subjected to custody to the Magistrate, who may detain him in custody until he executes such bond, or restraint. until the hearing of the case is completed. Diary of 192. (1) Every police officer making an investigation under this Chapter shall day by proceedings in day enter his proceedings in the investigation in a diary, setting forth the time at which the investigation. information reached him, the time at which he began and closed his investigation, the place 10 or places visited by him, and a statement of the circumstances ascertained through his investigation. (2) The statements of witnesses recorded during the course of investigation under section 180 shall be inserted in the case diary. (3) The diary referred to in sub-section (1) shall be a volume and duly paginated. 15 (4) Any Criminal Court may send for the police diaries of a case under inquiry or trial in such Court, and may use such diaries, not as evidence in the case, but to aid it in such inquiry or trial. (5) Neither the accused nor his agents shall be entitled to call for such diaries, nor shall he or they be entitled to see them merely because they are referred to by the Court; but, 20 if they are used by the police officer who made them to refresh his memory, or if the Court uses them for the purpose of contradicting such police officer, the provisions of section 148 or section 164, as the case may be, of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023, shall apply. Report of 193. (1) Every investigation under this Chapter shall be completed without police officer unnecessary delay. 25 on completion of (2) The investigation in relation to an offence under sections 64, 66, 67, 68, 70, 71 of investigation. the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or under sections 4, 6, 8 or section 10 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 shall be completed within two months from the 32 of 2012. date on which the information was recorded by the officer in charge of the police station. (3) (i) As soon as the investigation is completed, the officer in charge of the police 30 station shall forward to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police report, a report in the form as the State Government may, by rules provide, stating— (a) the names of the parties; (b) the nature of the information; (c) the names of the persons who appear to be acquainted with the circumstances 35 of the case; (d) whether any offence appears to have been committed and, if so, by whom; (e) whether the accused has been arrested; (f) whether the accused has been released on his bond and, if so, whether with or without sureties; 40 (g) whether the accused has been forwarded in custody under section 190; (h) whether the report of medical examination of the woman has been attached where investigation relates to an offence under sections 64, 66, 67, 68 or section 70 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. (ii) The police officer shall, within a period of ninety days, inform the progress of the investigation by any means including electronic communication to the informant or the victim. (iii) The officer shall also communicate, in such manner as the State Government may, 5 by rules, provide, the action taken by him, to the person, if any, by whom the information relating to the commission of the offence was first given. (4) Where a superior officer of police has been appointed under section 177, the report shall, in any case in which the State Government by general or special order so directs, be submitted through that officer, and he may, pending the orders of the Magistrate, 10 direct the officer in charge of the police station to make further investigation. (5) Whenever it appears from a report forwarded under this section that the accused has been released on his bond, the Magistrate shall make such order for the discharge of such bond or otherwise as he thinks fit. (6) When such report is in respect of a case to which section 190 applies, the police 15 officer shall forward to the Magistrate along with the report— (a) all documents or relevant extracts thereof on which the prosecution proposes to rely other than those already sent to the Magistrate during investigation; (b) the statements recorded under section 180 of all the persons whom the prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses. 20 (7) If the police officer is of opinion that any part of any such statement is not relevant to the subject-matter of the proceedings or that its disclosure to the accused is not essential in the interests of justice and is inexpedient in the public interest, he shall indicate that part of the statement and append a note requesting the Magistrate to exclude that part from the copies to be granted to the accused and stating his reasons for making such request. 25 (8) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (7), the police officer investigating the case shall also submit such number of copies of the police report along with other documents duly indexed to the Judicial Magistrate for supply to the accused as required under section 230: Provided that supply of report and other documents by electronic communication 30 shall be considered as duly served. (9) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude further investigation in respect of an offence after a report under sub-section (3) has been forwarded to the Magistrate and, where upon such investigation, the officer in charge of the police station obtains further evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward to the Magistrate a further report or reports 35 regarding such evidence in the form as the State Government may, by rules, provide; and the provisions of sub-sections (3) to (7) shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such report or reports as they apply in relation to a report forwarded under sub-section (3): Provided that further investigation during the trial may be permitted with the permission of the Court trying the case and the same shall be completed within a period of 40 ninety days which may extend with the permission of the Court. 194. (1) When the officer in charge of a police station or some other police officer Police to specially empowered by the State Government in that behalf receives information that a enquire and person has committed suicide, or has been killed by another or by an animal or by machinery report on suicide, etc. or by an accident, or has died under circumstances raising a reasonable suspicion that 45 some other person has committed an offence, he shall immediately give intimation thereof to the nearest Executive Magistrate empowered to hold inquests, and, unless otherwise directed by any rule made by the State Government, or by any general or special order of the District or Sub-divisional Magistrate, shall proceed to the place where the body of such deceased person is, and there, in the presence of two or more respectable inhabitants of the neighbourhood, shall make an investigation, and draw up a report of the apparent cause of death, describing such wounds, fractures, bruises, and other marks of injury as may be found on the body, and stating in what manner, or by what weapon or instrument (if any); such marks appear to have been inflicted. (2) The report shall be signed by such police officer and other persons, or by so many 5 of them as concur therein, and shall be forwarded to the District Magistrate or the Sub-divisional Magistrate within twenty-four hours. (3) When— (i) the case involves suicide by a woman within seven years of her marriage; or (ii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of her marriage 10 in any circumstances raising a reasonable suspicion that some other person committed an offence in relation to such woman; or (iii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of her marriage and any relative of the woman has made a request in this behalf; or (iv) there is any doubt regarding the cause of death; or 15 (v) the police officer for any other reason considers it expedient so to do, he shall, subject to such rules as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf, forward the body, with a view to its being examined, to the nearest Civil Surgeon, or other qualified medical person appointed in this behalf by the State Government, if the state of the weather and the distance admit of its being so forwarded without risk of such putrefaction on the 20 road as would render such examination useless. (4) The following Magistrates are empowered to hold inquests, namely, any District Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate and any other Executive Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf by the State Government or the District Magistrate. Power to 195. (1) A police officer proceeding under section 194 may, by order in writing, summon 25 summon two or more persons as aforesaid for the purpose of the said investigation, and any other persons. person who appears to be acquainted with the facts of the case and every person so summoned shall be bound to attend and to answer truly all questions other than questions the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture: 30 Provided that no male person under the age of fifteen years or above the age of sixty years or a woman or a mentally or physically disabled person or a person with acute illness shall be required to attend at any place other than the place where such person resides, unless such person is willing to attend and answer at the police station or at any other place within the limits of such police station. 35 (2) If the facts do not disclose a cognizable offence to which section 190 applies, such persons shall not be required by the police officer to attend a Magistrate's Court. Inquiry by 196. (1) When the case is of the nature referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) of Magistrate sub-section (3) of section 194, the nearest Judicial Magistrate empowered to hold inquests into cause of shall, and in any other case mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 194, any Magistrate so 40 death. empowered may hold an inquiry into the cause of death either instead of, or in addition to, the investigation held by the police officer; and if he does so, he shall have all the powers in conducting it which he would have in holding an inquiry into an offence. (2) Where,— (a) any person dies or disappears, or 45 (b) rape is alleged to have been committed on any woman, while such person or woman is in the custody of the police or in any other custody authorised by the Magistrate or the Court, under this Sanhita in addition to the inquiry or investigation held by the police, an inquiry shall be held by the Judicial Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the offence has been committed. (3) The Magistrate holding such an inquiry shall record the evidence taken by him in 5 connection therewith in any manner hereinafter specified according to the circumstances of the case. (4) Whenever such Magistrate considers it expedient to make an examination of the dead body of any person who has been already interred, in order to discover the cause of his death, the Magistrate may cause the body to be disinterred and examined. 10 (5) Where an inquiry is to be held under this section, the Magistrate shall, wherever practicable, inform the relatives of the deceased whose names and addresses are known, and shall allow them to remain present at the inquiry. (6) The Judicial Magistrate or the Executive Magistrate or the police officer holding an inquiry or investigation under sub-section (2) shall, within twenty-four hours of the 15 death of a person, forward the body with a view to its being examined to the nearest Civil Surgeon or other qualified medical person appointed in this behalf by the State Government, unless it is not possible to do so for reasons to be recorded in writing. Explanation.—In this section, the expression "relative" means parents, children, brothers, sisters and spouse. 20 CHAPTER XIV JURISDICTION OF THE CRIMINAL COURTS IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS 197. Every offence shall ordinarily be inquired into and tried by a Court within whose Ordinary place local jurisdiction it was committed. of inquiry and trial. 198. (a) When it is uncertain in which of several local areas an offence was Place of 25 committed; or inquiry or trial. (b) where an offence is committed partly in one local area and partly in another; or (c) where an offence is a continuing one, and continues to be committed in more local areas than one; or (d) where it consists of several acts done in different local areas, 30 it may be inquired into or tried by a Court having jurisdiction over any of such local areas. 199. When an act is an offence by reason of anything which has been done and of a Offence consequence which has ensued, the offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court within triable where whose local jurisdiction such thing has been done or such consequence has ensued. act is done or consequence ensues. 200. When an act is an offence by reason of its relation to any other act which is also Place of trial 35 an offence or which would be an offence if the doer were capable of committing an offence, where act is an offence by the first-mentioned offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local reason of jurisdiction either act was done. relation to other offence. 201. (1) Any offence of dacoity, or of dacoity with murder, of belonging to a gang of Place of trial dacoits, or of escaping from custody, may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose in case of 40 local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the accused person is found. certain offences. (2) Any offence of kidnapping or abduction of a person may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the person was kidnapped or abducted or was conveyed or concealed or detained. (3) Any offence of theft, extortion or robbery may be inquired into or tried by a Court 45 within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the stolen property which is the subject of the offence was possessed by any person committing it or by any person who received or retained such property knowing or having reason to believe it to be stolen property. (4) Any offence of criminal misappropriation or of criminal breach of trust may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed 5 or any part of the property which is the subject of the offence was received or retained, or was required to be returned or accounted for, by the accused person. (5) Any offence which includes the possession of stolen property may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the stolen property was possessed by any person who received or retained it knowing or 10 having reason to believe it to be stolen property. Offences 202. (1) Any offence which includes cheating may, if the deception is practised by committed by means of electronic communications or letters or telecommunication messages, be inquired means of into or tried by any Court within whose local jurisdiction such electronic communications electronic communications, or letters or messages were sent or were received; and any offence of cheating and 15 letters, etc. dishonestly inducing delivery of property may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the property was delivered by the person deceived or was received by the accused person. (2) Any offence punishable under section 81 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed 20 or the offender last resided with his or her spouse by the first marriage, or the wife by the first marriage has taken up permanent residence after the commission of the offence. Offence 203. When an offence is committed whilst the person by or against whom, or the committed on thing in respect of which, the offence is committed is in the course of performing a journey journey or or voyage, the offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court through or into whose local 25 voyage. jurisdiction that person or thing passed in the course of that journey or voyage. Place of trial 204. Where— for offences triable (a) the offences committed by any person are such that he may be charged together. with, and tried at one trial for, each such offence by virtue of the provisions of section 242, section 243 or section 244, or 30 (b) the offence or offences committed by several persons are such that they may be charged with and tried together by virtue of the provisions of section 246, the offences may be inquired into or tried by any Court competent to inquire into or try any of the offences. Power to 205. Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding provisions of this Chapter, 35 order cases to the State Government may direct that any cases or class of cases committed for trial in any be tried in district may be tried in any sessions division: different sessions Provided that such direction is not repugnant to any direction previously issued by divisions. the High Court or the Supreme Court under the Constitution, or under this Sanhita or any other law for the time being in force. 40 High Court to 206. Where two or more Courts have taken cognizance of the same offence and a decide, in case question arises as to which of them ought to inquire into or try that offence, the question of doubt, shall be decided— district where inquiry or trial (a) if the Courts are subordinate to the same High Court, by that High Court; shall take place. (b) if the Courts are not subordinate to the same High Court, by the High Court 45 within the local limits of whose appellate criminal jurisdiction the proceedings were first commenced, and thereupon all other proceedings in respect of that offence shall be discontinued. 207. (1) When a Magistrate of the first class sees reason to believe that any person Power to issue within his local jurisdiction has committed outside such jurisdiction (whether within or summons or warrant for outside India) an offence which cannot, under the provisions of sections 197 to 205 (both offence inclusive), or any other law for the time being in force, be inquired into or tried within such committed 5 jurisdiction but is under some law for the time being in force triable in India, such Magistrate beyond local may inquire into the offence as if it had been committed within such local jurisdiction and jurisdiction. compel such person in the manner hereinbefore provided to appear before him, and send such person to the Magistrate having jurisdiction to inquire into or try such offence, or, if such offence is not punishable with death or imprisonment for life and such person is ready 10 and willing to give bail to the satisfaction of the Magistrate acting under this section, take a bond with or without sureties for his appearance before the Magistrate having such jurisdiction. (2) When there are more Magistrates than one having such jurisdiction and the Magistrate acting under this section cannot satisfy himself as to the Magistrate to or before 15 whom such person should be sent or bound to appear, the case shall be reported for the orders of the High Court. 208. When an offence is committed outside India— Offence committed (a) by a citizen of India, whether on the high seas or elsewhere; or outside India. (b) by a person, not being such citizen, on any ship or aircraft registered in 20 India, he may be dealt with in respect of such offence as if it had been committed at any place within India at which he may be found or where the offence is registered in India: Provided that notwithstanding anything in any of the preceding sections of this Chapter, no such offence shall be inquired into or tried in India except with the previous 25 sanction of the Central Government. 209. When any offence alleged to have been committed in a territory outside India is Receipt of being inquired into or tried under the provisions of section 208, the Central Government evidence relating to may, if it thinks fit, direct that copies of depositions made or exhibits produced, either in offences physical form or in electronic form, before a Judicial officer, in or for that territory or before committed 30 a diplomatic or consular representative of India in or for that territory shall be received as outside India. evidence by the Court holding such inquiry or trial in any case in which such Court might issue a commission for taking evidence as to the matters to which such depositions or exhibits relate. CHAPTER XV 35 CONDITIONS REQUISITE FOR INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS 210. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate of the first class, Cognizance of and any Judicial Magistrate of the second class specially empowered in this behalf under offences by Magistrates. sub-section (2), may take cognizance of any offence— (a) upon receiving a complaint of facts, including any complaint filed by a 40 person authorised under any special law, which constitutes such offence; (b) upon a police report (recorded in any mode including digital mode) of such facts; (c) upon information received from any person other than a police officer, or upon his own knowledge, that such offence has been committed. 45 (2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any Magistrate of the second class to take cognizance under sub-section (1) of such offences as are within his competence to inquire into or try. (3) Any Magistrate empowered under this section, shall upon receiving a complaint against a public servant arising in course of the discharge of his official duties, take cognizance, subject to— (a) receiving a report containing facts and circumstances of the incident from the officer superior to such public servant; and 5 (b) after consideration of the assertions made by the public servant as to the situation that led to the incident so alleged. Transfer on 211. When a Magistrate takes cognizance of an offence under clause (c) of application of sub-section (1) of section 210, the accused shall, before any evidence is taken, be informed accused. that he is entitled to have the case inquired into or tried by another Magistrate, and if the 10 accused or any of the accused, if there be more than one, objects to further proceedings before the Magistrate taking cognizance, the case shall be transferred to such other Magistrate as may be specified by the Chief Judicial Magistrate in this behalf. Making over 212. (1) Any Chief Judicial Magistrate may, after taking cognizance of an offence, of cases to make over the case for inquiry or trial to any competent Magistrate subordinate to him. 15 Magistrates. (2) Any Judicial Magistrate of the first class empowered in this behalf by the Chief Judicial Magistrate may, after taking cognizance of an offence, make over the case for inquiry or trial to such other competent Judicial Magistrate as the Chief Judicial Magistrate may, by general or special order, specify, and thereupon such Magistrate may hold the inquiry or trial. 20 Cognizance of 213. Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Sanhita or by any other law for offences by the time being in force, no Court of Session shall take cognizance of any offence as a Court Courts of of original jurisdiction unless the case has been committed to it by a Magistrate under this Session. Sanhita. Additional 214. An Additional Sessions Judge shall try such cases as the Sessions Judge of the 25 Sessions Judges division may, by general or special order, make over to him for trial or as the High Court may, to try cases by special order, direct him to try. made over to them. Prosecution 215. (1) No Court shall take cognizance— for contempt (a) (i) of any offence punishable under sections 204 to 224 (both inclusive but of lawful authority of excluding section 207) of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, or 30 public (ii) of any abetment of, or attempt to commit, such offence, or servants, for offences (iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit such offence, against public justice and for except on the complaint in writing of the public servant concerned or of some other public offences servant to whom he is administratively subordinate or of some other public servant who is relating to authorised by the concerned public servant so to do; 35 documents given in (b) (i) of any offence punishable under any of the following sections of the evidence. Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, namely, sections 227 to 231 (both inclusive), 234, 235, 240 to 246 (both inclusive) and 265, when such offence is alleged to have been committed in, or in relation to, any proceeding in any Court; or (ii) of any offence described in section 334, or punishable under section 337, 40 section 340 or section 341 of the said Sanhita, when such offence is alleged to have been committed in respect of a document produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in any Court; or (iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit, or the abetment of, any offence specified in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii), 45 except on the complaint in writing of that Court or by such officer of the Court as that Court may authorise in writing in this behalf, or of some other Court to which that Court is subordinate. (2) Where a complaint has been made by a public servant or by some other public servant who has been authorised to do so by him under clause (a) of sub-section (1), any authority to which he is administratively subordinate or who has authorised such public servant may order the withdrawal of the complaint and send a copy of such order to the 5 Court; and upon its receipt by the Court, no further proceedings shall be taken on the complaint: Provided that no such withdrawal shall be ordered if the trial in the Court of first instance has been concluded. (3) In clause (b) of sub-section (1), the term "Court" means a Civil, Revenue or 10 Criminal Court, and includes a tribunal constituted by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act if declared by that Act to be a Court for the purposes of this section. (4) For the purposes of clause (b) of sub-section (1), a Court shall be deemed to be subordinate to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the appealable decrees or sentences of such former Court, or in the case of a Civil Court from whose decrees no appeal 15 ordinarily lies, to the Principal Court having ordinary original civil jurisdiction within whose local jurisdiction such Civil Court is situate: Provided that— (a) where appeals lie to more than one Court, the Appellate Court of inferior jurisdiction shall be the Court to which such Court shall be deemed to be subordinate; 20 (b) where appeals lie to a Civil and also to a Revenue Court, such Court shall be deemed to be subordinate to the Civil or Revenue Court according to the nature of the case or proceeding in connection with which the offence is alleged to have been committed. 216. A witness or any other person may file a complaint in relation to an offence Procedure for 25 under section 230 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. witnesses in case of threatening, etc. 217. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of— Prosecution for offences (a) any offence punishable under Chapter VI or under section 194, section 297 against the or sub-section (1) of section 351 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; or State and for criminal (b) a criminal conspiracy to commit such offence; or conspiracy to commit such offence. 30 (c) any such abetment, as is described in section 47 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of the State Government. (2) No Court shall take cognizance of— (a) any offence punishable under section 195 or sub-section (2) or 35 sub-section (3) of section 351 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; or (b) a criminal conspiracy to commit such offence, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of the State Government or of the District Magistrate. (3) No Court shall take cognizance of the offence of any criminal conspiracy punishable 40 under section 61 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, other than a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards, unless the State Government or the District Magistrate has consented in writing to the initiation of the proceedings: Provided that where the criminal conspiracy is one to which the provisions of section 215 apply, no such consent shall be necessary. (4) The Central Government or the State Government may, before according sanction under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) and the District Magistrate may, before according sanction under sub-section (2) and the State Government or the District Magistrate may, 5 before giving consent under sub-section (3), order a preliminary investigation by a police officer not being below the rank of Inspector, in which case such police officer shall have the powers referred to in sub-section (3) of section 174. Prosecution of 218. (1) When any person who is or was a Judge or Magistrate or a public servant not Judges and removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the Government is accused of any 10 public offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the servants. discharge of his official duty, no Court shall take cognizance of such offence except with the previous sanction save as otherwise provided in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013— 1 of 2014. (a) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may be, was at the time of commission of the alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of 15 the Union, of the Central Government; (b) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may be, was at the time of commission of the alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of a State, of the State Government: Provided that where the alleged offence was committed by a person referred to in 20 clause (b) during the period while a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 356 of the Constitution was in force in a State, clause (b) will apply as if for the expression "State Government" occurring therein, the expression "Central Government" were substituted: Provided further that such Government shall take a decision within a period of one hundred and twenty days from the date of the receipt of the request for sanction and in case 25 it fails to do so, the sanction shall be deemed to have been accorded by such Government: Provided also no sanction shall be required in case of a public servant accused of any offence alleged to have been committed under section 197, section 198, section 63, section 66, section 68, section 70, section 73, section 74, section 75, section 76, section 77, section 141, or section 351 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 30 (2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence alleged to have been committed by any member of the Armed Forces of the Union while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government. (3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply to such class or category of the members of the Forces charged 35 with the maintenance of public order as may be specified therein, wherever they may be serving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub-section will apply as if for the expression "Central Government" occurring therein, the expression "State Government" were substituted. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), no Court shall take 40 cognizance of any offence, alleged to have been committed by any member of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order in a State while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty during the period while a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 356 of the Constitution was in force therein, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government. 45 (5) The Central Government or the State Government, may determine the person by whom, the manner in which, and the offence or offences for which, the prosecution of such Judge, Magistrate or public servant is to be conducted, and may specify the Court before which the trial is to be held. 219. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter V of Prosecution for offences the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 except upon a complaint made by some person aggrieved against by the offence: marriage. Provided that— 5 (a) where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is having intellectual disability requiring higher support needs or a person with mental illness, or is from sickness or infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local customs and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in public, some other person may, with the leave of the Court, make a complaint on his or her behalf; 10 (b) where such person is the husband and he is serving in any of the Armed Forces of the Union under conditions which are certified by his Commanding Officer as precluding him from obtaining leave of absence to enable him to make a complaint in person, some other person authorised by the husband in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (4) may make a complaint on his behalf; 15 (c) where the person aggrieved by an offence punishable under section 81 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is the wife, complaint may be made on her behalf by her father, mother, brother, sister, son or daughter or by her father's or mother's brother or sister, or, with the leave of the Court, by any other person related to her by blood, marriage or adoption. 20 (2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), no person other than the husband of the woman shall be deemed to be aggrieved by any offence punishable under section 83 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: Provided that in the absence of the husband, some person who had care of the woman on his behalf at the time when such offence was committed may, with the leave of 25 the Court, make a complaint on his behalf. (3) When in any case falling under clause (a) of the proviso to sub-section (1), the complaint is sought to be made on behalf of a person under the age of eighteen years or of a person with mental illness by a person who has not been appointed or declared by a competent authority to be the guardian of the person of the minor or a person with mental 30 illness, and the Court is satisfied that there is a guardian so appointed or declared, the Court shall, before granting the application for leave, cause notice to be given to such guardian and give him a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (4) The authorisation referred to in clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1), shall be in writing, shall be signed or otherwise attested by the husband, shall contain a statement 35 to the effect that he has been informed of the allegations upon which the complaint is to be founded, shall be countersigned by his Commanding Officer, and shall be accompanied by a certificate signed by that Officer to the effect that leave of absence for the purpose of making a complaint in person cannot for the time being be granted to the husband. (5) Any document purporting to be such an authorisation and complying with the 40 provisions of sub-section (4), and any document purporting to be a certificate required by that sub-section shall, unless the contrary is proved, be presumed to be genuine and shall be received in evidence. (6) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence under section 64 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, where such offence consists of sexual intercourse by a man with his 45 own wife, the wife being under eighteen years of age, if more than one year has elapsed from the date of the commission of the offence. (7) The provisions of this section apply to the abetment of, or attempt to commit, an offence as they apply to the offence. Prosecution of 220. No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 84 of the offences under Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 except upon a police report of facts which constitute such section 84 of offence or upon a complaint made by the person aggrieved by the offence or by her father, 5 Bharatiya Nyaya mother, brother, sister or by her father's or mother's brother or sister or, with the leave of the Sanhita, 2023. Court, by any other person related to her by blood, marriage or adoption. Cognizance of 221. No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 67 of the offence. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 where the persons are in a marital relationship, except upon prima facie satisfaction of the facts which constitute the offence upon a complaint having 10 been filed or made by the wife against the husband. Prosecution 222. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter XIX for of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 except upon a complaint made by some person defamation. aggrieved by the offence: Provided that where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is having 15 intellectual disability requiring higher support needs or a person with mental illness, or is from sickness or infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local customs and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in public, some other person may, with the leave of the Court, make a complaint on his or her behalf. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Sanhita, when any offence falling 20 under Chapter XIX of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is alleged to have been committed against a person who, at the time of such commission, is the President of India, the Vice-President of India, the Governor of a State, the Administrator of a Union territory or a Minister of the Union or of a State or of a Union territory, or any other public servant employed in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State in respect of his conduct 25 in the discharge of his public functions, a Court of Session may take cognizance of such offence, without the case being committed to it, upon a complaint in writing made by the Public Prosecutor. (3) Every complaint referred to in sub-section (2) shall set forth the facts which constitute the offence alleged, the nature of such offence and such other particulars as are 30 reasonably sufficient to give notice to the accused of the offence alleged to have been committed by him. (4) No complaint under sub-section (2) shall be made by the Public Prosecutor except with the previous sanction— (a) of the State Government,— 35 (i) in the case of a person who is or has been the Governor of that State or a Minister of that Government; (ii) in the case of any other public servant employed in connection with the affairs of the State; (b) of the Central Government, in any other case. 40 (5) No Court of Session shall take cognizance of an offence under sub-section (2) unless the complaint is made within six months from the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed. (6) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of the person against whom the offence is alleged to have been committed, to make a complaint in respect of that offence 45 before a Magistrate having jurisdiction or the power of such Magistrate to take cognizance of the offence upon such complaint. CHAPTER XVI COMPLAINTS TO MAGISTRATES 5 223. A Magistrate having jurisdiction while taking cognizance of an offence on Examination complaint shall examine upon oath the complainant and the witnesses present, if any, and of complainant. the substance of such examination shall be reduced to writing and shall be signed by the complainant and the witnesses, and also by the Magistrate: Provided that no cognizance of an offence under this section shall be taken by the 10 Magistrate without giving the accused an opportunity of being heard: Provided further that, when the complaint is made in writing, the Magistrate need not examine the complainant and the witnesses— (a) if a public servant acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties or a Court has made the complaint; or 15 (b) if the Magistrate makes over the case for inquiry or trial to another Magistrate under section 212: Provided further that if the Magistrate makes over the case to another Magistrate under section 212 after examining the complainant and the witnesses, the latter Magistrate need not re-examine them: 20 Provided further that in case of a complaint against a public servant, the Magistrate shall comply with the procedure provided in section 217. 224. If the complaint is made to a Magistrate who is not competent to take cognizance Procedure by of the offence, he shall,— Magistrate not competent to (a) if the complaint is in writing, return it for presentation to the proper Court take 25 with an endorsement to that effect; cognizance of case. (b) if the complaint is not in writing, direct the complainant to the proper Court. 225. (1) Any Magistrate, on receipt of a complaint of an offence of which he is Postponement authorised to take cognizance or which has been made over to him under section 212, may, of issue of process. if he thinks fit, and shall, in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area 30 in which he exercises his jurisdiction, postpone the issue of process against the accused, and either inquire into the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by a police officer or by such other person as he thinks fit, for the purpose of deciding whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding: Provided that no such direction for investigation shall be made,— 35 (a) where it appears to the Magistrate that the offence complained of is triable exclusively by the Court of Session; or (b) where the complaint has not been made by a Court, unless the complainant and the witnesses present (if any) have been examined on oath under section 223. (2) In an inquiry under sub-section (1), the Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, take 40 evidence of witnesses on oath: Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that the offence complained of is triable exclusively by the Court of Session, he shall call upon the complainant to produce all his witnesses and examine them on oath. (3) If an investigation under sub-section (1) is made by a person not being a police 45 officer, he shall have for that investigation all the powers conferred by this Sanhita on an officer in-charge of a police station except the power to arrest without warrant. Dismissal of 226. If, after considering the statements on oath (if any) of the complainant and of the complaint. witnesses and the result of the inquiry or investigation (if any) under section 225, the Magistrate is of opinion that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding, he shall dismiss the complaint, and in every such case he shall briefly record his reasons for so doing. CHAPTER XVIII 5 COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE MAGISTRATES Issue of 227. (1) If in the opinion of a Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence there is process. sufficient ground for proceeding, and the case appears to be— (a) a summons-case, he shall issue summons to the accused for his attendance; or 10 (b) a warrant-case, he may issue a warrant, or, if he thinks fit, a summons, for causing the accused to be brought or to appear at a certain time before such Magistrate or (if he has no jurisdiction himself) some other Magistrate having jurisdiction. (2) No summons or warrant shall be issued against the accused under sub-section (1) until a list of the prosecution witnesses has been filed. 15 (3) In a proceeding instituted upon a complaint made in writing, every summons or warrant issued under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a copy of such complaint: Provided that summons or warrants may also be issued through electronic means. (4) When by any law for the time being in force any process-fees or other fees are payable, no process shall be issued until the fees are paid and, if such fees are not paid 20 within a reasonable time, the Magistrate may dismiss the complaint. (5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the provisions of section 90. Magistrate 228. (1) Whenever a Magistrate issues a summons, he may, if he sees reason so to do, may dispense dispense with the personal attendance of the accused and permit him to appear by his with personal pleader. 25 attendance of accused. (2) But the Magistrate inquiring into or trying the case may, in his discretion, at any stage of the proceedings, direct the personal attendance of the accused, and, if necessary, enforce such attendance in the manner hereinbefore provided. Special 229. (1) If, in the opinion of a Magistrate taking cognizance of a petty offence, the summons in case may be summarily disposed of under sections 283, 284 or section 285, the Magistrate 30 cases of petty shall, except where he is, for reasons to be recorded in writing of a contrary opinion, issue offence. summons to the accused requiring him either to appear in person or by pleader before the Magistrate on a specified date, or if he desires to plead guilty to the charge without appearing before the Magistrate, to transmit before the specified date, by post or by messenger to the Magistrate, the said plea in writing and the amount of fine specified in the summons or if he 35 desires to appear by pleader and to plead guilty to the charge through such pleader, to authorise, in writing, the pleader to plead guilty to the charge on his behalf and to pay the fine through such pleader: Provided that the amount of the fine specified in such summons shall not exceed five thousand rupees. 40 (2) For the purposes of this section, "petty offence" means any offence punishable only with fine not exceeding five thousand rupees, but does not include any offence so punishable under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, or under any other law which provides for 59 of 1988. convicting the accused person in his absence on a plea of guilty. (3) The State Government may, by notification, specially empower any Magistrate to 45 exercise the powers conferred by sub-section (1) in relation to any offence which is compoundable under section 359 or any offence punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months, or with fine, or with both where the Magistrate is of opinion that, having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, the imposition of fine only would meet the ends of justice. 230. In any case where the proceeding has been instituted on a police report, the Supply to Magistrate shall without delay, and in no case beyond fourteen days from the date of accused of copy of police production or appearance of the accused, furnish to the accused and the victim (if represented report and by an advocate) free of cost, a copy of each of the following:— other documents. 5 (i) the police report; (ii) the first information report recorded under section 193; (iii) the statements recorded under sub-section (3) of section 180 of all persons whom the prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses, excluding therefrom any part in regard to which a request for such exclusion has been made by the police 10 officer under sub-section (6) of section 193; (iv) the confessions and statements, if any, recorded under section 183; (v) any other document or relevant extract thereof forwarded to the Magistrate with the police report under sub-section (5) of section 193: Provided that the Magistrate may, after perusing any such part of a statement as is 15 referred to in clause (iii) and considering the reasons given by the police officer for the request, direct that a copy of that part of the statement or of such portion thereof as the Magistrate thinks proper, shall be furnished to the accused: Provided further that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any such document is voluminous, he shall, instead of furnishing the accused and the victim (if represented by an 20 advocate) with a copy thereof, may furnish the copies through electronic means or direct that he will only be allowed to inspect it either personally or through advocate in Court: Provided also that supply of documents in electronic form shall be considered as duly furnished. 231. Where, in a case instituted otherwise than on a police report, it appears to the Supply of 25 Magistrate issuing process under section 227 that the offence is triable exclusively by the copies of statements Court of Session, the Magistrate shall forthwith furnish to the accused, free of cost, a copy and documents of each of the following:— to accused in other cases (i) the statements recorded under section 223 or section 225, of all persons triable by examined by the Magistrate; Court of Session. 30 (ii) the statements and confessions, if any, recorded under section 180 or section 183; (iii) any documents produced before the Magistrate on which the prosecution proposes to rely: Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any such document is voluminous, he 35 shall, instead of furnishing the accused with a copy thereof, direct that he will only be allowed to inspect it either personally or through pleader in Court: Provided further that supply of documents in electronic form shall be considered as duly furnished. 232. When in a case instituted on a police report or otherwise, the accused appears or Commitment 40 is brought before the Magistrate and it appears to the Magistrate that the offence is triable of case to Court of Session when exclusively by the Court of Session, he shall— offence is (a) commit, after complying with the provisions of section 230 or section 231 triable exclusively by the case to the Court of Session, and subject to the provisions of this Sanhita relating it. to bail, remand the accused to custody until such commitment has been made; 45 (b) subject to the provisions of this Sanhita relating to bail, remand the accused to custody during, and until the conclusion of, the trial; (c) send to that Court the record of the case and the documents and articles, if any, which are to be produced in evidence; (d) notify the Public Prosecutor of the commitment of the case to the Court of Session: Provided that the proceedings under this section shall be completed within a period of ninety days from the date of taking cognizance, and such period may be extended by the Magistrate for a period not exceeding one hundred and eighty days for the reasons to be 5 recorded in writing: Provided further that any application filed before the Magistrate by the accused or the victim or any person authorised by such person in a case triable by Court of Session, shall be forwarded to the Court of Session with the committal of the case. Procedure to 233. (1) When in a case instituted otherwise than on a police report (hereinafter 10 be followed referred to as a complaint case), it is made to appear to the Magistrate, during the course of when there is the inquiry or trial held by him, that an investigation by the police is in progress in relation a complaint case and to the offence which is the subject-matter of the inquiry or trial held by him, the Magistrate police shall stay the proceedings of such inquiry or trial and call for a report on the matter from the investigation police officer conducting the investigation. 15 in respect of same offence. (2) If a report is made by the investigating police officer under section 193 and on such report cognizance of any offence is taken by the Magistrate against any person who is an accused in the complaint case, the Magistrate shall inquire into or try together the complaint case and the case arising out of the police report as if both the cases were instituted on a police report. 20 (3) If the police report does not relate to any accused in the complaint case or if the Magistrate does not take cognizance of any offence on the police report, he shall proceed with the inquiry or trial, which was stayed by him, in accordance with the provisions of this Sanhita. CHAPTER XIX THE CHARGE 25 A.—Form of charges Contents of 234. (1) Every charge under this Sanhita shall state the offence with which the accused charge. is charged. (2) If the law which creates the offence gives it any specific name, the offence may be described in the charge by that name only. 30 (3) If the law which creates the offence does not give it any specific name, so much of the definition of the offence must be stated as to give the accused notice of the matter with which he is charged. (4) The law and section of the law against which the offence is said to have been committed shall be mentioned in the charge. 35 (5) The fact that the charge is made is equivalent to a statement that every legal condition required by law to constitute the offence charged was fulfilled in the particular case. (6) The charge shall be written in the language of the Court. (7) If the accused, having been previously convicted of any offence, is liable, by 40 reason of such previous conviction, to enhanced punishment, or to punishment of a different kind, for a subsequent offence, and it is intended to prove such previous conviction for the purpose of affecting the punishment which the Court may think fit, to award for the subsequent offence, the fact, date and place of the previous conviction shall be stated in the charge; and if such statement has been omitted, the Court may add it at any time before 45 sentence is passed. Illustrations. (a) A is charged with the murder of B. This is equivalent to a statement that A's act fell within the definition of murder given in sections 98 and 99 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; that it did not fall within any of the general exceptions of the said Sanhita; and that it did not fall within any of the five exceptions to section 99, or that, if it did fall within Exception 1, one or other of the three provisos to that exception applied to it. (b) A is charged under section 116 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, with 5 voluntarily causing grievous hurt to B by means of an instrument for shooting. This is equivalent to a statement that the case was not provided for by section 120 of the said Sanhita, and that the general exceptions did not apply to it. (c) A is accused of murder, cheating, theft, extortion, adultery or criminal intimidation, or using a false property-mark. The charge may state that A committed murder, or 10 cheating, or theft, or extortion, or adultery, or criminal intimidation, or that he used a false property-mark, without reference to the definitions, of those crimes contained in the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; but the sections under which the offence is punishable must, in each instance be referred to in the charge. (d) A is charged under section 220 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, with 15 intentionally obstructing a sale of property offered for sale by the lawful authority of a public servant. The charge should be in those words. 235. (1) The charge shall contain such particulars as to the time and place of the Particulars as alleged offence, and the person (if any) against whom, or the thing (if any) in respect of to time, place which, it was committed, as are reasonably sufficient to give the accused notice of the and person. 20 matter with which he is charged. (2) When the accused is charged with criminal breach of trust or dishonest misappropriation of money or other movable property, it shall be sufficient to specify the gross sum or, as the case may be, describe the movable property in respect of which the offence is alleged to have been committed, and the dates between which the offence is 25 alleged to have been committed, without specifying particular items or exact dates, and the charge so framed shall be deemed to be a charge of one offence within the meaning of section 242: Provided that the time included between the first and last of such dates shall not exceed one year. 30 236. When the nature of the case is such that the particulars mentioned in When manner sections 234 and 235 do not give the accused sufficient notice of the matter with which he of committing is charged, the charge shall also contain such particulars of the manner in which the alleged offence must be stated. offence was committed as will be sufficient for that purpose. Illustrations. 35 (a) A is accused of the theft of a certain article at a certain time and place. The charge need not set out the manner in which the theft was effected. (b) A is accused of cheating B at a given time and place. The charge must set out the manner in which A cheated B. (c) A is accused of giving false evidence at a given time and place. The charge must 40 set out that portion of the evidence given by A which is alleged to be false. (d) A is accused of obstructing B, a public servant, in the discharge of his public functions at a given time and place. The charge must set out the manner in which A obstructed B in the discharge of his functions. (e) A is accused of the murder of B at a given time and place. The charge need not 45 state the manner in which A murdered B. (f) A is accused of disobeying a direction of the law with intent to save B from punishment. The charge must set out the disobedience charged and the law infringed. 237. In every charge words used in describing an offence shall be deemed to have Words in charge been used in the sense attached to them respectively by the law under which such offence taken in sense of law under which 50 is punishable. offence is punishable. Effect of 238. No error in stating either the offence or the particulars required to be stated in errors. the charge, and no omission to state the offence or those particulars, shall be regarded at any stage of the case as material, unless the accused was in fact misled by such error or omission, and it has occasioned a failure of justice. Illustrations. 5 (a) A is charged under section 178 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, with "having been in possession of counterfeit coin, having known at the time when he became possessed thereof that such coin was counterfeit," the word "fraudulently" being omitted in the charge. Unless it appears that A was in fact misled by this omission, the error shall not be regarded as material. 10 (b) A is charged with cheating B, and the manner in which he cheated B is not set out in the charge or is set out incorrectly. A defends himself, calls witnesses and gives his own account of the transaction. The Court may infer from this that the omission to set out the manner of the cheating is not material. (c) A is charged with cheating B, and the manner in which he cheated B is not set out 15 in the charge. There were many transactions between A and B, and A had no means of knowing to which of them the charge referred, and offered no defence. The Court may infer from such facts that the omission to set out the manner of the cheating was, in the case, a material error. (d) A is charged with the murder of Khoda Baksh on the 21st January, 2023. In fact, the 20 murdered person's name was Haidar Baksh, and the date of the murder was the 20th January, 2023. A was never charged with any murder but one, and had heard the inquiry before the Magistrate, which referred exclusively to the case of Haidar Baksh. The Court may infer from these facts that A was not misled, and that the error in the charge was immaterial. (e) A was charged with murdering Haidar Baksh on the 20th January, 2023, and Khoda 25 Baksh (who tried to arrest him for that murder) on the 21st January, 2023. When charged for the murder of Haidar Baksh, he was tried for the murder of Khoda Baksh. The witnesses present in his defence were witnesses in the case of Haidar Baksh. The Court may infer from this that A was misled, and that the error was material. Court may 239. (1) Any Court may alter or add to any charge at any time before judgment is 30 alter charge. pronounced. (2) Every such alteration or addition shall be read and explained to the accused. (3) If the alteration or addition to a charge is such that proceeding immediately with the trial is not likely, in the opinion of the Court, to prejudice the accused in his defence or the prosecutor in the conduct of the case, the Court may, in its discretion, after such 35 alteration or addition has been made, proceed with the trial as if the altered or added charge had been the original charge. (4) If the alteration or addition is such that proceeding immediately with the trial is likely, in the opinion of the Court, to prejudice the accused or the prosecutor as aforesaid, the Court may either direct a new trial or adjourn the trial for such period as may be necessary. 40 (5) If the offence stated in the altered or added charge is one for the prosecution of which previous sanction is necessary, the case shall not be proceeded with until such sanction is obtained, unless sanction has been already obtained for a prosecution on the same facts as those on which the altered or added charge is founded. 240. Whenever a charge is altered or added to by the Court after the commencement 45 Recall of witnesses of the trial, the prosecutor and the accused shall be allowed— when charge (a) to recall or re-summon, and examine with reference to such alteration or altered. addition, any witness who may have been examined, unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers that the prosecutor or the accused, as the case may be, desires to recall or re-examine such witness for the purpose of vexation or delay or 50 for defeating the ends of justice; (b) also to call any further witness whom the Court may think to be material. 241. (1) For every distinct offence of which any person is accused there shall be a Separate separate charge, and every such charge shall be tried separately: charges for distinct Provided that where the accused person, by an application in writing, so desires and offences. 5 the Magistrate is of opinion that such person is not likely to be prejudiced thereby, the Magistrate may try together all or any number of the charges framed against such person. (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect the operation of the provisions of sections 242, 243, 244 and 246. Illustration. 10 A is accused of a theft on one occasion, and of causing grievous hurt on another occasion. A must be separately charged and separately tried for the theft and causing grievous hurt. 242. (1) When a person is accused of more offences than one of the same kind Offences of committed within the space of twelve months from the first to the last of such offences, same kind 15 whether in respect of the same person or not, he may be charged with, and tried at one trial within year may be for, any number of them not exceeding five. charged (2) Offences are of the same kind when they are punishable with the same amount of together. punishment under the same section of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or of any special or local law: 20 Provided that, for the purposes of this section, an offence punishable under section 301 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 shall be deemed to be an offence of the same kind as an offence punishable under section 303 of the said Sanhita, and that an offence punishable under any section of the said Sanhita, or of any special or local law, shall be deemed to be an offence of the same kind as an attempt to commit such offence, when 25 such an attempt is an offence. 243. (1) If, in one series of acts so connected together as to form the same transaction, Trial for more more offences than one are committed by the same person, he may be charged with, and than one tried at one trial for, every such offence. offence. (2) When a person charged with one or more offences of criminal breach of trust or 30 dishonest misappropriation of property as provided in sub-section (2) of section 235 or in sub-section (1) of section 242, is accused of committing, for the purpose of facilitating or concealing the commission of that offence or those offences, one or more offences of falsification of accounts, he may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, every such offence. 35 (3) If the acts alleged constitute an offence falling within two or more separate definitions of any law in force for the time being by which offences are defined or punished, the person accused of them may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, each of such offences. (4) If several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselves constitute an offence, constitute when combined a different offence, the person accused of 40 them may be charged with, and tried at one trial for the offence constituted by such acts when combined, and for any offence constituted by any one, or more, of such acts. (5) Nothing contained in this section shall affect section 12 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. Illustrations to sub-section (1) 45 (a) A rescues B, a person in lawful custody, and in so doing causes grievous hurt to C, a constable in whose custody B was. A may be charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 261 and 119 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. (b) A commits house-breaking by day with intent to commit adultery, and commits, in the house so entered, adultery with B's wife. A may be separately charged with, and convicted 50 of, offences under section 330 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. (c) A entices B, the wife of C, away from C, with intent to commit adultery with B, and then commits adultery with her. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under section 83 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. (d) A has in his possession several seals, knowing them to be counterfeit and intending to use them for the purpose of committing several forgeries punishable under section 335 of 5 the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, the possession of each seal under section 339 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita. (e) With intent to cause injury to B, A institutes a criminal proceeding against him, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for such proceeding, and also falsely accuses B of having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for such 10 charge. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, two offences under section 246 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. (f) A, with intent to cause injury to B, falsely accuses him of having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for such charge. On the trial, A gives false evidence against B, intending thereby to cause B to be convicted of a capital offence. 15 A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 246 and 228 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. (g) A, with six others, commits the offences of rioting, grievous hurt and assaulting a public servant endeavouring in the discharge of his duty as such to suppress the riot. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 189, 115 and 193 20 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. (h) A threatens B, C and D at the same time with injury to their persons with intent to cause alarm to them. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, each of the three offences under section 309 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. The separate charges referred to in illustrations (a) to (h), respectively, may be tried 25 at the same time. Illustrations to sub-section (3) (i) A wrongfully strikes B with a cane. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 129 and 113 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. (j) Several stolen sacks of corn are made over to A and B, who knew they are stolen 30 property, for the purpose of concealing them. A and B thereupon voluntarily assist each other to conceal the sacks at the bottom of a grain-pit. A and B may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under section 315 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. (k) A exposes her child with the knowledge that she is thereby likely to cause its death. The child dies in consequence of such exposure. A may be separately charged with, 35 and convicted of, offences under sections 91 and 103 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. (l) A dishonestly uses a forged document as genuine evidence, in order to convict B, a public servant, of an offence under section 199 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 338 (read with section 466) and 196 of that Sanhita. 40 Illustration to sub-section (4) (m) A commits robbery on B, and in doing so voluntarily causes hurt to him. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 323, 392 and 394 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. Where it is 244. (1) If a single act or series of acts is of such a nature that it is doubtful which of 45 doubtful what several offences the facts which can be proved will constitute, the accused may be charged offence has with having committed all or any of such offences, and any number of such charges may be been committed. tried at once; or he may be charged in the alternative with having committed some one of the said offences. (2) If in such a case the accused is charged with one offence, and it appears in evidence that he committed a different offence for which he might have been charged under the provisions of sub-section (1), he may be convicted of the offence which he is shown to have committed, although he was not charged with it. 5 Illustrations. (a) A is accused of an act which may amount to theft, or receiving stolen property, or criminal breach of trust or cheating. He may be charged with theft, receiving stolen property, criminal breach of trust and cheating, or he may be charged with having committed theft, or receiving stolen property, or criminal breach of trust or cheating. 10 (b) In the case mentioned, A is only charged with theft. It appears that he committed the offence of criminal breach of trust, or that of receiving stolen goods. He may be convicted of criminal breach of trust or of receiving stolen goods (as the case may be), though he was not charged with such offence. (c) A states on oath before the Magistrate that he saw B hit C with a club. Before the 15 Sessions Court A states on oath that B never hit C. A may be charged in the alternative and convicted of intentionally giving false evidence, although it cannot be proved which of these contradictory statements was false. When offence 245. (1) When a person is charged with an offence consisting of several particulars, proved included in a combination of some only of which constitutes a complete minor offence, and such offence 20 combination is proved, but the remaining particulars are not proved, he may be convicted of charged. the minor offence, though he was not charged with it. (2) When a person is charged with an offence and facts are proved which reduce it to a minor offence, he may be convicted of the minor offence, although he is not charged with it. 25 (3) When a person is charged with an offence, he may be convicted of an attempt to commit such offence although the attempt is not separately charged. (4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a conviction of any minor offence where the conditions requisite for the initiation of proceedings in respect of that minor offence have not been satisfied. 30 Illustrations. (a) A is charged, under section 314 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, with criminal breach of trust in respect of property entrusted to him as a carrier. It appears, that he did commit criminal breach of trust under section 314 of that Sanhita in respect of the property, but that it was not entrusted to him as a carrier. He may be convicted of criminal breach of 35 trust under the said section 314. (b) A is charged, under section 115 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, with causing grievous hurt. He proves that he acted on grave and sudden provocation. He may be convicted under section 120 of that Sanhita. What persons 246. The following persons may be charged and tried together, namely:— may be charged 40 (a) persons accused of the same offence committed in the course of the same jointly. transaction; (b) persons accused of an offence and persons accused of abetment of, or attempt to commit, such offence; (c) persons accused of more than one offence of the same kind, within the 45 meaning of section 242 committed by them jointly within the period of twelve months; (d) persons accused of different offences committed in the course of the same transaction; (e) persons accused of an offence which includes theft, extortion, cheating, or criminal misappropriation, and persons accused of receiving or retaining, or assisting 50 in the disposal or concealment of, property possession of which is alleged to have been transferred by any such offence committed by the first-named persons, or of abetment of or attempting to commit any such last-named offence; (f) persons accused of offences under section 315 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or either of those sections in respect of stolen property the possession of which has been transferred by one offence; 5 (g) persons accused of any offence under Chapter XII of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 relating to counterfeit coin and persons accused of any other offence under the said Chapter relating to the same coin, or of abetment of or attempting to commit any such offence; and the provisions contained in the former part of this Chapter shall, so far as may be, apply to all such charges: 10 Provided that where a number of persons are charged with separate offences and such persons do not fall within any of the categories specified in this section, the Magistrate or Court of Session may, if such persons by an application in writing, so desire, and if he or it is satisfied that such persons would not be prejudicially affected thereby, and it is expedient so to do, try all such persons together. 15 Withdrawal of 247. When a charge containing more heads than one is framed against the same remaining person, and when a conviction has been had on one or more of them, the complainant, or charges on the officer conducting the prosecution, may, with the consent of the Court, withdraw the conviction on one of several remaining charge or charges, or the Court of its own accord may stay the inquiry into, or trial charges. of, such charge or charges and such withdrawal shall have the effect of an acquittal on such 20 charge or charges, unless the conviction be set aside, in which case the said Court (subject to the order of the Court setting aside the conviction) may proceed with the inquiry into, or trial of, the charge or charges so withdrawn. CHAPTER XX TRIAL BEFORE A COURT OF SESSION 25 Trial to be 248. In every trial before a Court of Session, the prosecution shall be conducted by a conducted by Public Prosecutor. Public Prosecutor. Opening case 249. When the accused appears or is brought before the Court, in pursuance of a for commitment of the case under section 232, or under any other law for the time being in force, prosecution. the prosecutor shall open his case by describing the charge brought against the accused 30 and stating by what evidence he proposes to prove the guilt of the accused. Discharge. 250. (1) The accused may prefer an application for discharge within a period of sixty days from the date of committal under section 232. (2) If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the documents submitted therewith, and after hearing the submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this 35 behalf, the Judge considers that there is not sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, he shall discharge the accused and record his reasons for so doing. Framing of 251. (1) If, after such consideration and hearing as aforesaid, the Judge is of opinion charge. that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence which— (a) is not exclusively triable by the Court of Session, he may, frame a charge against the accused and, by order, transfer the case for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or any other Judicial Magistrate of the first class and direct the accused to appear before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or the Judicial Magistrate of the first class, on such date as he deems fit, and thereupon such Magistrate shall try the offence in accordance with the procedure for the trial of warrant-cases instituted on a 45 police report; (b) is exclusively triable by the Court, he shall frame in writing a charge against the accused within a period of sixty days from the date of first hearing on charge. (2) Where the Judge frames any charge under clause (b) of sub-section (1), the charge shall be read and explained to the accused present either physically or through electronic means and the accused shall be asked whether he pleads guilty of the offence charged or claims to be tried. 5 252. If the accused pleads guilty, the Judge shall record the plea and may, in his Conviction on discretion, convict him thereon. plea of guilty. 253. If the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead, or claims to be tried or is not Date for convicted under section 252, the Judge shall fix a date for the examination of witnesses, and prosecution evidence. may, on the application of the prosecution, issue any process for compelling the attendance 10 of any witness or the production of any document or other thing. 254. (1) On the date so fixed, the Judge shall proceed to take all such evidence as may Evidence for be produced in support of the prosecution: prosecution. Provided that evidence of a witness under this sub-section may be recorded by audio-video electronic means. 15 (2) The deposition of evidence of any police officer or public servant may be taken through audio-video electronic means. (3) The Judge may, in his discretion, permit the cross-examination of any witness to be deferred until any other witness or witnesses have been examined or recall any witness for further cross-examination. 20 255. If, after taking the evidence for the prosecution, examining the accused and Acquittal. hearing the prosecution and the defence on the point, the Judge considers that there is no evidence that the accused committed the offence, the Judge shall record an order of acquittal. 256. (1) Where the accused is not acquitted under section 255, he shall be called Entering upon upon to enter on his defence and adduce any evidence he may have in support thereof. defence. 25 (2) If the accused puts in any written statement, the Judge shall file it with the record. (3) If the accused applies for the issue of any process for compelling the attendance of any witness or the production of any document or thing, the Judge shall issue such process unless he considers, for reasons to be recorded, that such application should be refused on the ground that it is made for the purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating 30 the ends of justice. 257. When the examination of the witnesses (if any) for the defence is complete, the Arguments. prosecutor shall sum up his case and the accused or his pleader shall be entitled to reply: Provided that where any point of law is raised by the accused or his pleader, the prosecution may, with the permission of the Judge, make his submissions with regard to 35 such point of law. 258. (1) After hearing arguments and points of law (if any), the Judge shall give a Judgment of judgment in the case, as soon as possible, within a period of thirty days from the date of acquittal or completion of arguments, which may for specific reasons extend to a period of sixty days. conviction. (2) If the accused is convicted, the Judge shall, unless he proceeds in accordance 40 with the provisions of section 401, hear the accused on the questions of sentence, and then pass sentence on him according to law. 259. In a case where a previous conviction is charged under the provisions of Previous sub-section (7) of section 234, and the accused does not admit that he has been previously conviction. convicted as alleged in the charge, the Judge may, after he has convicted the said accused 45 under section 252 or section 258, take evidence in respect of the alleged previous conviction, and shall record a finding thereon: Provided that no such charge shall be read out by the Judge nor shall the accused be asked to plead thereto nor shall the previous conviction be referred to by the prosecution or in any evidence adduced by it, unless and until the accused has been convicted under section 252 or section 258. Procedure in 260. (1) A Court of Session taking cognizance of an offence under sub-section (1) of 5 cases section 222 shall try the case in accordance with the procedure for the trial of warrant-cases instituted instituted otherwise than on a police report before a Court of Magistrate: under sub- section (1) of Provided that the person against whom the offence is alleged to have been committed Section 223. shall, unless the Court of Session, for reasons to be recorded, otherwise directs, be examined as a witness for the prosecution. 10 (2) Every trial under this section shall be held in camera if either party thereto so desires or if the Court thinks fit so to do. (3) If, in any such case, the Court discharges or acquits all or any of the accused and is of opinion that there was no reasonable cause for making the accusation against them or any of them, it may, by its order of discharge or acquittal, direct the person against whom 15 the offence was alleged to have been committed (other than the President, Vice-President or the Governor of a State or the Administrator of a Union territory) to show cause why he should not pay compensation to such accused or to each or any of such accused, when there are more than one. (4) The Court shall record and consider any cause which may be shown by the person 20 so directed, and if it is satisfied that there was no reasonable cause for making the accusation, it may, for reasons to be recorded, make an order that compensation to such amount not exceeding five thousand rupees, as it may determine, be paid by such person to the accused or to each or any of them. (5) Compensation awarded under sub-section (4) shall be recovered as if it were a fine 25 imposed by a Magistrate. (6) No person who has been directed to pay compensation under sub-section (4) shall, by reason of such order, be exempted from any civil or criminal liability in respect of the complaint made under this section: Provided that any amount paid to an accused person under this section shall be taken 30 into account in awarding compensation to such person in any subsequent civil suit relating to the same matter. (7) The person who has been ordered under sub-section (4) to pay compensation may appeal from the order, in so far as it relates to the payment of compensation, to the High Court. 35 (8) When an order for payment of compensation to an accused person is made, the compensation shall not be paid to him before the period allowed for the presentation of the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal is presented, before the appeal has been decided. CHAPTER XXI TRIAL OF WARRANT-CASES BY MAGISTRATES 40 A.—Cases instituted on a police report Compliance 261. When, in any warrant-case instituted on a police report, the accused appears or with section is brought before a Judicial Magistrate at the commencement of the trial, the Judicial 231. Magistrate shall satisfy himself that he has complied with the provisions of section 230. When accused 262. (1) The accused may prefer an application for discharge within a period of sixty 45 shall be days from the date of framing of charges. discharged. (2) If, upon considering the police report and the documents sent with it under section 293 and making such examination, if any, of the accused as the Magistrate thinks necessary and after giving the prosecution and the accused an opportunity of being heard, the Magistrate considers the charge against the accused to be groundless, he shall discharge the accused, and record his reasons for so doing. 263. (1) If, upon such consideration, examination, if any, and hearing, the Magistrate Framing of 5 is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence charge. triable under this Chapter, which such Magistrate is competent to try and which, in his opinion, could be adequately punished by him, he shall frame in writing a charge against the accused within a period of sixty days from the date of first hearing on charge. (2) The charge shall then be read and explained to the accused, and he shall be asked 10 whether he pleads guilty of the offence charged or claims to be tried. 264. If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea and may, in his Conviction on discretion, convict him thereon. plea of guilty. 265. (1) If the accused refuses to plead or does not plead, or claims to be tried or the Evidence for Magistrate does not convict the accused under section 264, the Magistrate shall fix a date prosecution. 15 for the examination of witnesses: Provided that the Magistrate shall supply in advance to the accused, the statement of witnesses recorded during investigation by the police. (2) The Magistrate may, on the application of the prosecution, issue a summons to any of its witnesses directing him to attend or to produce any document or other thing. 20 (3) On the date so fixed, the Magistrate shall proceed to take all such evidence as may be produced in support of the prosecution: Provided that the Magistrate may permit the cross-examination of any witness to be deferred until any other witness or witnesses have been examined or recall any witness for further cross-examination: 25 Provided further that evidence of a witness under this sub-section may be recorded by audio-video electronic means. 266. (1) The accused shall then be called upon to enter upon his defence and produce Evidence for his evidence; and if the accused puts in any written statement, the Magistrate shall file it defence. with the record. 30 (2) If the accused, after he has entered upon his defence, applies to the Magistrate to issue any process for compelling the attendance of any witness for the purpose of examination or cross-examination, or the production of any document or other thing, the Magistrate shall issue such process unless he considers that such application should be refused on the ground that it is made for the purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating the ends of 35 justice and such ground shall be recorded by him in writing: Provided that when the accused has cross-examined or had the opportunity of cross-examining any witness before entering on his defence, the attendance of such witness shall not be compelled under this section, unless the Magistrate is satisfied that it is necessary for the ends of justice. 40 (3) The Magistrate may, before summoning any witness on an application under sub-section (2), require that the reasonable expenses incurred by the witness in attending for the purposes of the trial be deposited in Court. B.—Cases instituted otherwise than on police report 267. (1) When, in any warrant-case instituted otherwise than on a police report, the Evidence for 45 accused appears or is brought before a Magistrate, the Magistrate shall proceed to hear the prosecution. prosecution and take all such evidence as may be produced in support of the prosecution. (2) The Magistrate may, on the application of the prosecution, issue a summons to any of its witnesses directing him to attend or to produce any document or other thing. When accused 268. (1) If, upon taking all the evidence referred to in section 267, the Magistrate shall be considers, for reasons to be recorded, that no case against the accused has been made out discharged. which, if unrebutted, would warrant his conviction, the Magistrate shall discharge him. (2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a Magistrate from discharging the accused at any previous stage of the case if, for reasons to be recorded by such 5 Magistrate, he considers the charge to be groundless. Procedure 269. (1) If, when such evidence has been taken, or at any previous stage of the case, where accused the Magistrate is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has is not committed an offence triable under this Chapter, which such Magistrate is competent to try discharged. and which, in his opinion, could be adequately punished by him, he shall frame in writing a 10 charge against the accused. (2) The charge shall then be read and explained to the accused, and he shall be asked whether he pleads guilty or has any defence to make. (3) If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea, and may, in his discretion, convict him thereon. 15 (4) If the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead or claims to be tried or if the accused is not convicted under sub-section (3), he shall be required to state, at the commencement of the next hearing of the case, or, if the Magistrate for reasons to be recorded in writing so thinks fit, forthwith, whether he wishes to cross-examine any, and, if so, which, of the witnesses for the prosecution whose evidence has been taken. 20 (5) If he says he does so wish, the witnesses named by him shall be recalled and, after cross-examination and re-examination (if any), they shall be discharged. (6) The evidence of any remaining witnesses for the prosecution shall next be taken, and after cross-examination and re-examination (if any), they shall also be discharged. (7) Where, despite giving opportunity to the prosecution and after taking all reasonable 25 measures under this Sanhita, if the attendance of the prosecution witnesses under sub-sections (5) and (6) cannot be secured for cross examination, it shall be deemed that such witness has not been examined for not being available, and the Magistrate may close the prosecution evidence for reasons to be recorded in writing and proceed with the case on the basis of the materials on record. 30 Evidence for 270. The accused shall then be called upon to enter upon his defence and produce defence. his evidence; and the provisions of section 266 shall apply to the case. C.—Conclusion of trial Acquittal or 271. (1) If, in any case under this Chapter in which a charge has been framed, the conviction. Magistrate finds the accused not guilty, he shall record an order of acquittal. 35 (2) Where, in any case under this Chapter, the Magistrate finds the accused guilty, but does not proceed in accordance with the provisions of section 364 or section 401, he shall, after hearing the accused on the question of sentence, pass sentence upon him according to law. (3) Where, in any case under this Chapter, a previous conviction is charged under the 40 provisions of sub-section (7) of section 234 and the accused does not admit that he has been previously convicted as alleged in the charge, the Magistrate may, after he has convicted the said accused, take evidence in respect of the alleged previous conviction, and shall record a finding thereon: Provided that no such charge shall be read out by the Magistrate nor shall the 45 accused be asked to plead thereto nor shall the previous conviction be referred to by the prosecution or in any evidence adduced by it, unless and until the accused has been convicted under sub-section (2). 272. When the proceedings have been instituted upon complaint, and on any day Absence of fixed for the hearing of the case, the complainant is absent, and the offence may be lawfully complainant. compounded or is not a cognizable offence, the Magistrate may after giving thirty days' time to the complainant to be present, in his discretion, notwithstanding anything 5 hereinbefore contained, at any time before the charge has been framed, discharge the accused. 273. (1) If, in any case instituted upon complaint or upon information given to a Compensation police officer or to a Magistrate, one or more persons is or are accused before a Magistrate for accusation of any offence triable by a Magistrate, and the Magistrate by whom the case is heard without reasonable 10 discharges or acquits all or any of the accused, and is of opinion that there was no reasonable cause. ground for making the accusation against them or any of them, the Magistrate may, by his order of discharge or acquittal, if the person upon whose complaint or information the accusation was made is present, call upon him forthwith to show cause why he should not pay compensation to such accused or to each or any of such accused when there are more 15 than one; or, if such person is not present, direct the issue of a summons to him to appear and show cause as aforesaid. (2) The Magistrate shall record and consider any cause which such complainant or informant may show, and if he is satisfied that there was no reasonable ground for making the accusation, may, for reasons to be recorded, make an order that compensation to such 20 amount, not exceeding the amount of fine he is empowered to impose, as he may determine, be paid by such complainant or informant to the accused or to each or any of them. (3) The Magistrate may, by the order directing payment of the compensation under sub-section (2), further order that, in default of payment, the person ordered to pay such compensation shall undergo simple imprisonment for a period not exceeding thirty days. 25 (4) When any person is imprisoned under sub-section (3), the provisions of sections 68 and 69 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 shall, so far as may be, apply. (5) No person who has been directed to pay compensation under this section shall, by reason of such order, be exempted from any civil or criminal liability in respect of the complaint made or information given by him: 30 Provided that any amount paid to an accused person under this section shall be taken into account in awarding compensation to such person in any subsequent civil suit relating to the same matter. (6) A complainant or informant who has been ordered under sub-section (2) by a Magistrate of the second class to pay compensation exceeding one thousand rupees, may 35 appeal from the order, as if such complainant or informant had been convicted on a trial held by such Magistrate. (7) When an order for payment of compensation to an accused person is made in a case which is subject to appeal under sub-section (6), the compensation shall not be paid to him before the period allowed for the presentation of the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal 40 is presented, before the appeal has been decided; and where such order is made in a case which is not so subject to appeal the compensation shall not be paid before the expiration of one month from the date of the order. (8) The provisions of this section apply to summons-cases as well as to warrant-cases. 45 CHAPTER XXII TRIAL OF SUMMONS-CASES BY MAGISTRATES 274. When in a summons-case the accused appears or is brought before the Substance of Magistrate, the particulars of the offence of which he is accused shall be stated to him, and accusation to be stated. he shall be asked whether he pleads guilty or has any defence to make, but it shall not be 50 necessary to frame a formal charge: Provided that if the Magistrate considers the accusation as groundless, he shall, after recording reasons in writing, release the accused and such release shall have the effect of discharge. Conviction on 275. If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea as nearly as plea of guilty. possible in the words used by the accused and may, in his discretion, convict him thereon. 5 Conviction on 276. (1) Where a summons has been issued under section 229 and the accused plea of guilty desires to plead guilty to the charge without appearing before the Magistrate, he shall in absence of transmit to the Magistrate, by post or by messenger, a letter containing his plea and also the accused in amount of fine specified in the summons. petty cases. (2) The Magistrate may, in his discretion, convict the accused in his absence, on his 10 plea of guilty and sentence him to pay the fine specified in the summons, and the amount transmitted by the accused shall be adjusted towards that fine, or where a pleader authorised by the accused in this behalf pleads guilty on behalf of the accused, the Magistrate shall record the plea as nearly as possible in the words used by the pleader and may, in his discretion, convict the accused on such plea and sentence him as aforesaid. 15 Procedure 277. (1) If the Magistrate does not convict the accused under section 275 or when not section 276, the Magistrate shall proceed to hear the prosecution and take all such evidence convicted. as may be produced in support of the prosecution, and also to hear the accused and take all such evidence as he produces in his defence. (2) The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, on the application of the prosecution or the 20 accused, issue a summons to any witness directing him to attend or to produce any document or other thing. (3) The Magistrate may, before summoning any witness on such application, require that the reasonable expenses of the witness incurred in attending for the purposes of the trial be deposited in Court. 25 Acquittal or 278. (1) If the Magistrate, upon taking the evidence referred to in section 277 and conviction. such further evidence, if any, as he may, of his own motion, cause to be produced, finds the accused not guilty, he shall record an order of acquittal. (2) Where the Magistrate does not proceed in accordance with the provisions of section 364 or section 401, he shall, if he finds the accused guilty, pass sentence upon him 30 according to law. (3) A Magistrate may, under section 275 or section 278, convict the accused of any offence triable under this Chapter, which from the facts admitted or proved he appears to have committed, whatever may be the nature of the complaint or summons, if the Magistrate is satisfied that the accused would not be prejudiced thereby. 35 Non-appearance 279. (1) If the summons has been issued on complaint, and on the day appointed for or death of the appearance of the accused, or any day subsequent thereto to which the hearing may be complainant. adjourned, the complainant does not appear, the Magistrate shall, notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, acquit the accused, unless for some reason he thinks it proper to adjourn the hearing of the case to some other day: 40 Provided that where the complainant is represented by a pleader or by the officer conducting the prosecution or where the Magistrate is of opinion that the personal attendance of the complainant is not necessary, the Magistrate may, dispense with his attendance and proceed with the case. (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall, so far as may be, apply also to cases 45 where the non-appearance of the complainant is due to his death. Withdrawal of 280. If a complainant, at any time before a final order is passed in any case under this complaint. Chapter, satisfies the Magistrate that there are sufficient grounds for permitting him to withdraw his complaint against the accused, or if there be more than one accused, against all or any of them, the Magistrate may permit him to withdraw the same, and shall thereupon acquit the accused against whom the complaint is so withdrawn. 281. In any summons-case instituted otherwise than upon complaint, a Magistrate of Power to stop the first class or, with the previous sanction of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, any other proceedings in certain cases. 5 Judicial Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded by him, stop the proceedings at any stage without pronouncing any judgment and where such stoppage of proceedings is made after the evidence of the principal witnesses has been recorded, pronounce a judgment of acquittal, and in any other case, release the accused, and such release shall have the effect of discharge. 10 282. When in the course of the trial of a summons-case relating to an offence punishable Power of with imprisonment for a term exceeding six months, it appears to the Magistrate that in the Court to interests of justice, the offence should be tried in accordance with the procedure for the trial convert summons- of warrant-cases, such Magistrate may proceed to re-hear the case in the manner provided cases into by this Sanhita for the trial of warrant-cases and may re-call any witness who may have warrant-cases. 15 been examined. CHAPTER XXIII SUMMARY TRIALS 283. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Sanhita— Power to try summarily. (a) any Chief Judicial Magistrate; 20 (b) Magistrate of the first class, shall try in a summary way all or any of the following offences:— (i) theft, under section 301, section 303 or section 304 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 where the value of the property stolen does not exceed twenty thousand rupees; 25 (ii) receiving or retaining stolen property, under section 315 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, where the value of the property does not exceed twenty thousand rupees; (iii) assisting in the concealment or disposal of stolen property under section 315 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, where the value of such 30 property does not exceed twenty thousand rupees; (iv) offences under section 330 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; (v) insult with intent to provoke a breach of the peace, under section 350, and criminal intimidation, under section 349 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; 35 (vi) abetment of any of the foregoing offences; (vii) an attempt to commit any of the foregoing offences, when such attempt is an offence; (viii) any offence constituted by an act in respect of which a complaint 1 of 1871. may be made under section 20 of the Cattle-trespass Act, 1871. 40 (2) The Magistrate may, after giving the accused a reasonable opportunity of being heard, for reasons to be recorded in writing, try in a summary way all or any of the offences not punishable with death or imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding three years. (3) When, in the course of a summary trial it appears to the Magistrate that the nature 45 of the case is such that it is undesirable to try it summarily, the Magistrate shall re-call any witnesses who may have been examined and proceed to re-hear the case in the manner provided by this Sanhita. Summary trial 284. The High Court may confer on any Magistrate invested with the powers of a by Magistrate Magistrate of the second class power to try summarily any offence which is punishable of second only with fine or with imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months with or without fine, class. and any abetment of or attempt to commit any such offence. Procedure for 285. (1) In trials under this Chapter, the procedure specified in this Sanhita for the trial 5 summary of summons-case shall be followed except as hereinafter mentioned. trials. (2) No sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding three months shall be passed in the case of any conviction under this Chapter. Record in 286. In every case tried summarily, the Magistrate shall enter, in such form as the summary State Government may direct, the following particulars, namely:— 10 trials. (a) the serial number of the case; (b) the date of the commission of the offence; (c) the date of the report or complaint; (d) the name of the complainant (if any); (e) the name, parentage and residence of the accused; 15 (f) the offence complained of and the offence (if any) proved, and in cases coming under clause (ii), clause (iii) or clause (iv) of sub-section (1) of section 283, the value of the property in respect of which the offence has been committed; (g) the plea of the accused and his examination (if any); (h) the finding; 20 (i) the sentence or other final order; (j) the date on which proceedings terminated. Judgement in 287. In every case tried summarily in which the accused does not plead guilty, the cases tried Magistrate shall record the substance of the evidence and a judgment containing a brief summarily. statement of the reasons for the finding. 25 Language of 288. (1) Every such record and judgment shall be written in the language of the Court. record and judgment. (2) The High Court may authorise any Magistrate empowered to try offences summarily to prepare the aforesaid record or judgment or both by means of an officer appointed in this behalf by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and the record or judgment so prepared shall be signed by such Magistrate. 30 CHAPTER XXIV PLEA BARGAINING Application of 289. (1) This Chapter shall apply in respect of an accused against whom— Chapter. (a) the report has been forwarded by the officer in charge of the police station under section 193 alleging therein that an offence appears to have been committed by 35 him other than an offence for which the punishment of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment for a term exceeding seven years has been provided under the law for the time being in force; or (b) a Magistrate has taken cognizance of an offence on complaint, other than an offence for which the punishment of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment for a term exceeding seven years, has been provided under the law for the time being in force, and after examining complainant and witnesses under section 223, issued the process under section 227, but does not apply where such offence affects the socio-economic condition of the country or has been committed against a woman, or a child below the age of fourteen years. (2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall, by notification, determine the offences under the law for the time being in force which shall be the offences 5 affecting the socio-economic condition of the country. 290. (1) A person accused of an offence may file an application for plea bargaining Application within a period of thirty days from the date of framing of charge in the Court in which such for plea bargaining. offence is pending for trial. (2) The application under sub-section (1) shall contain a brief description of the case 10 relating to which the application is filed including the offence to which the case relates and shall be accompanied by an affidavit sworn by the accused stating therein that he has voluntarily preferred, after understanding the nature and extent of punishment provided under the law for the offence, the plea bargaining in his case and that he has not previously been convicted by a Court in a similar case. 15 (3) After receiving the application under sub-section (1), the Court shall issue notice to the Public Prosecutor or the complainant of the case and to the accused to appear on the date fixed for the case. (4) When the Public Prosecutor or the complainant of the case and the accused appear on the date fixed under sub-section (3), the Court shall examine the accused in 20 camera, where the other party in the case shall not be present, to satisfy itself that the accused has filed the application voluntarily and where— (a) the Court is satisfied that the application has been filed by the accused voluntarily, it shall provide time, not exceeding sixty days, to the Public Prosecutor or the complainant of the case and the accused to work out a mutually satisfactory 25 disposition of the case which may include giving to the victim by the accused the compensation and other expenses during the case and thereafter fix the date for further hearing of the case; (b) the Court finds that the application has been filed involuntarily by the accused or he has previously been convicted by a Court in a case in which he had 30 been charged with the same offence, it shall proceed further in accordance with the provisions of this Sanhita from the stage such application has been filed under sub-section (1). 291. In working out a mutually satisfactory disposition under clause (a) of Guidelines for sub-section (4) of section 290, the Court shall follow the following procedure, namely:— mutually satisfactory 35 (a) in a case instituted on a police report, the Court shall issue notice to the disposition. Public Prosecutor, the police officer who has investigated the case, the accused and the victim of the case to participate in the meeting to work out a satisfactory disposition of the case: Provided that throughout such process of working out a satisfactory disposition 40 of the case, it shall be the duty of the Court to ensure that the entire process is completed voluntarily by the parties participating in the meeting: Provided further that the accused, if he so desires, participate in such meeting with his pleader, if any, engaged in the case; (b) in a case instituted otherwise than on police report, the Court shall issue 45 notice to the accused and the victim of the case to participate in a meeting to work out a satisfactory disposition of the case: Provided that it shall be the duty of the Court to ensure, throughout such process of working out a satisfactory disposition of the case, that it is completed voluntarily by the parties participating in the meeting: Provided further that if the victim of the case or the accused so desires, he may participate in such meeting with his pleader engaged in the case. Report of 292. Where in a meeting under section 291, a satisfactory disposition of the case has mutually been worked out, the Court shall prepare a report of such disposition which shall be signed satisfactory by the presiding officer of the Court and all other persons who participated in the meeting 5 disposition to and if no such disposition has been worked out, the Court shall record such observation be submitted before Court. and proceed further in accordance with the provisions of this Sanhita from the stage the application under sub-section (1) of section 290 has been filed in such case. Disposal of 293. Where a satisfactory disposition of the case has been worked out under case. section 292, the Court shall dispose of the case in the following manner, namely:— 10 (a) the Court shall award the compensation to the victim in accordance with the disposition under section 292 and hear the parties on the quantum of the punishment, releasing of the accused on probation of good conduct or after admonition under section 401 or for dealing with the accused under the provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 or any other law for the time being in force and follow the procedure 15 20 of 1958. specified in the succeeding clauses for imposing the punishment on the accused; (b) after hearing the parties under clause (a), if the Court is of the view that section 401 or the provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 or any other law 20 of 1958. for the time being in force are attracted in the case of the accused, it may release the accused on probation or provide the benefit of any such law; 20 (c) after hearing the parties under clause (b), if the Court finds that minimum punishment has been provided under the law for the offence committed by the accused, it may sentence the accused to half of such minimum punishment, and where the accused is a first-time offender and has not been convicted of any offence in the past, it may sentence the accused to one-fourth of such minimum punishment; 25 (d) in case after hearing the parties under clause (b), the Court finds that the offence committed by the accused is not covered under clause (b) or clause (c), then, it may sentence the accused to one-fourth of the punishment provided or extendable, as the case may be, for such offence and where the accused is a first-time offender and has not been convicted of any offence in the past, it may sentence the accused to 30 one-sixth of the punishment provided or extendable, as the case may be, for such offence. Judgment of 294. The Court shall deliver its judgment in terms of section 293 in the open Court and Court. the same shall be signed by the presiding officer of the Court. Finality of 295. The judgment delivered by the Court under this section shall be final and no 35 judgement. appeal (except the special leave petition under article 136 and writ petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution) shall lie in any Court against such judgment. Power of 296. A Court shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Court in plea Chapter, all the powers vested in respect of bail, trial of offences and other matters relating bargaining. to the disposal of a case in such Court under this Sanhita. 40 Period of 297. The provisions of section 469 shall apply, for setting off the period of detention detention undergone by the accused against the sentence of imprisonment imposed under this Chapter, undergone by in the same manner as they apply in respect of the imprisonment under other provisions of accused to be this Sanhita. set off against sentence of imprisonment. Savings. 298. The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding anything 45 inconsistent therewith contained in any other provisions of this Sanhita and nothing in such other provisions shall be construed to constrain the meaning of any provision of this Chapter. Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression "Public Prosecutor" has the meaning assigned to it under clause (t) of section 2 and includes an Assistant Public Prosecutor appointed under section 19. 299. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the Statements of 5 statements or facts stated by an accused in an application for plea bargaining filed under accused not to be used. section 290 shall not be used for any other purpose except for the purpose of this Chapter. 300. Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to any juvenile or child as defined in section2 Non- 2 of 2016. of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015. application of Chapter. CHAPTER XXV 10 ATTENDANCE OF PERSONS CONFINED OR DETAINED IN PRISONS 301. In this Chapter,— Definitions. (a) "detained" includes detained under any law providing for preventive detention; (b) "prison" includes,— 15 (i) any place which has been declared by the State Government, by general or special order, to be a subsidiary jail; (ii) any reformatory, Borstal institution or institution of a like nature. 302. (1) Whenever, in the course of an inquiry, trial or proceeding under this Sanhita, Power to it appears to a Criminal Court,— require attendance of 20 (a) that a person confined or detained in a prison should be brought before the prisoners. Court for answering to a charge of an offence, or for the purpose of any proceedings against him; or (b) that it is necessary for the ends of justice to examine such person as a witness, 25 the Court may make an order requiring the officer in charge of the prison to produce such person before the Court answering to the charge or for the purpose of such proceeding or for giving evidence. (2) Where an order under sub-section (1) is made by a Magistrate of the second class, it shall not be forwarded to, or acted upon by, the officer in charge of the prison unless it is 30 countersigned by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, to whom such Magistrate is subordinate. (3) Every order submitted for countersigning under sub-section (2) shall be accompanied by a statement of the facts which, in the opinion of the Magistrate, render the order necessary, and the Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom it is submitted may, after considering such statement, decline to countersign the order. 35 303. (1) The State Government or the Central Government, as the case may be, may, at Power of State any time, having regard to the matters specified in sub-section (2), by general or special Government or Central order, direct that any person or class of persons shall not be removed from the prison in Government which he or they may be confined or detained, and thereupon, so long as the order remains to exclude in force, no order made under section 302, whether before or after the order of the State certain 40 Government, shall have effect in respect of such person or class of persons. persons from operation of (2) Before making an order under sub-section (1), the State Government or the Central section 302. Government in the cases instituted by its central agency, as the case may be, shall have regard to the following matters, namely:— (a) the nature of the offence for which, or the grounds on which, the person or 45 class of persons has been ordered to be confined or detained in prison; (b) the likelihood of the disturbance of public order if the person or class of persons is allowed to be removed from the prison; (c) the public interest, generally. Officer in 304. Where the person in respect of whom an order is made under section 302— charge of prison to (a) is by reason of sickness or infirmity unfit to be removed from the prison; or 5 abstain from (b) is under committal for trial or under remand pending trial or pending a carrying out order in preliminary investigation; or certain contingencies. (c) is in custody for a period which would expire before the expiration of the time required for complying with the order and for taking him back to the prison in which he is confined or detained; or 10 (d) is a person to whom an order made by the State Government under section 303 applies, the officer in charge of the prison shall abstain from carrying out the Court's order and shall send to the Court a statement of reasons for so abstaining: Provided that where the attendance of such person is required for giving evidence at 15 a place not more than twenty-five kilometres distance from the prison, the officer in charge of the prison shall not so abstain for the reason mentioned in clause (b). Prisoner to be 305. Subject to the provisions of section 304, the officer in charge of the prison shall, brought to upon delivery of an order made under sub-section (1) of section 302 and duly countersigned, Court in where necessary, under sub-section (2) thereof, cause the person named in the order to be 20 custody. taken to the Court in which his attendance is required, so as to be present there at the time mentioned in the order, and shall cause him to be kept in custody in or near the Court until he has been examined or until the Court authorises him to be taken back to the prison in which he was confined or detained. Power to issue 306. The provisions of this Chapter shall be without prejudice to the power of the 25 commission Court to issue, under section 319, a commission for the examination, as a witness, of any for person confined or detained in a prison; and the provisions of Part B of Chapter XXVI shall examination apply in relation to the examination on commission of any such person in the prison as they of witness in prison. apply in relation to the examination on commission of any other person. CHAPTER XXVI 30 EVIDENCE IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS A.—Mode of taking and recording evidence Language of 307. The State Government may determine what shall be, for purposes of this Sanhita, Courts. the language of each Court within the State other than the High Court. Evidence to be 308. Except as otherwise expressly provided, all evidence taken in the course of the 35 taken in trial or other proceeding shall be taken in the presence of the accused, or, when his personal presence of attendance is dispensed with, in the presence of his pleader: accused. Provided that where the evidence of a woman below the age of eighteen years who is alleged to have been subjected to rape or any other sexual offence, is to be recorded, the court may take appropriate measures to ensure that such woman is not confronted by the 40 accused while at the same time ensuring the right of cross-examination of the accused. Explanation.—In this section, "accused" includes a person in relation to whom any proceeding under Chapter IX has been commenced under this Sanhita. Record in 309. (1) In all summons-cases tried before a Magistrate, in all inquiries under sections summons- 165 to 168 (both inclusive), and in all proceedings under section 493 otherwise than in the 45 cases and course of a trial, the Magistrate shall, as the examination of each witness proceeds, make a inquiries. memorandum of the substance of the evidence in the language of the Court: Provided that if the Magistrate is unable to make such memorandum himself, he shall, after recording the reason of his inability, cause such memorandum to be made in writing or from his dictation in open Court. (2) Such memorandum shall be signed by the Magistrate and shall form part of the 5 record. 310. (1) In all warrant-cases tried before a Magistrate, the evidence of each witness Record in shall, as his examination proceeds, be taken down in writing either by the Magistrate himself warrant-cases. or by his dictation in open Court or, where he is unable to do so owing to a physical or other incapacity, under his direction and superintendence, by an officer of the Court appointed 10 by him in this behalf: Provided that evidence of a witness under this sub-section may also be recorded by audio-video electronic means in the presence of the advocate of the person accused of the offence. (2) Where the Magistrate causes the evidence to be taken down, he shall record a 15 certificate that the evidence could not be taken down by himself for the reasons referred to in sub-section (1). (3) Such evidence shall ordinarily be taken down in the form of a narrative; but the Magistrate may, in his discretion take down, or cause to be taken down, any part of such evidence in the form of question and answer. 20 (4) The evidence so taken down shall be signed by the Magistrate and shall form part of the record. 311. (1) In all trials before a Court of Session, the evidence of each witness shall, as Record in trial his examination proceeds, be taken down in writing either by the presiding Judge himself or before Court of Session. by his dictation in open Court, or under his direction and superintendence, by an officer of 25 the Court appointed by him in this behalf. (2) Such evidence shall ordinarily be taken down in the form of a narrative, but the presiding Judge may, in his discretion, take down, or cause to be taken down, any part of such evidence in the form of question and answer. (3) The evidence so taken down shall be signed by the presiding Judge and shall form 30 part of the record. 312. In every case where evidence is taken down under sections 310 or 311,— Language of record of (a) if the witness gives evidence in the language of the Court, it shall be taken evidence. down in that language; (b) if he gives evidence in any other language, it may, if practicable, be taken 35 down in that language, and if it is not practicable to do so, a true translation of the evidence in the language of the Court shall be prepared as the examination of the witness proceeds, signed by the Magistrate or presiding Judge, and shall form part of the record; (c) where under clause (b) evidence is taken down in a language other than the 40 language of the Court, a true translation thereof in the language of the Court shall be prepared as soon as practicable, signed by the Magistrate or presiding Judge, and shall form part of the record: Provided that when under clause (b) evidence is taken down in English and a translation thereof in the language of the Court is not required by any of the parties, 45 the Court may dispense with such translation. 313. (1) As the evidence of each witness taken under section 310 or section 311 is Procedure in completed, it shall be read over to him in the presence of the accused, if in attendance, or of regard to such evidence when his pleader, if he appears by pleader, and shall, if necessary, be corrected. completed. (2) If the witness denies the correctness of any part of the evidence when the same is read over to him, the Magistrate or presiding Judge may, instead of correcting the evidence, make a memorandum thereon of the objection made to it by the witness and shall add such remarks as he thinks necessary. (3) If the record of the evidence is in a language different from that in which it has 5 been given and the witness does not understand that language, the record shall be interpreted to him in the language in which it was given, or in a language which he understands. Interpretation 314. (1) Whenever any evidence is given in a language not understood by the accused, of evidence to and he is present in Court in person, it shall be interpreted to him in open Court in a accused or his language understood by him. 10 pleader. (2) If he appears by pleader and the evidence is given in a language other than the language of the Court, and not understood by the pleader, it shall be interpreted to such pleader in that language. (3) When documents are put for the purpose of formal proof, it shall be in the discretion of the Court to interpret as much thereof as appears necessary. 15 Remarks 315. When a presiding Judge or Magistrate has recorded the evidence of a witness, respecting he shall also record such remarks (if any) as he thinks material respecting the demeanour of demeanour of such witness whilst under examination. witness. Record of 316. (1) Whenever the accused is examined by any Magistrate, or by a Court of examination Session, the whole of such examination, including every question put to him and every 20 of accused. answer given by him, shall be recorded in full by the presiding Judge or Magistrate himself or where he is unable to do so owing to a physical or other incapacity, under his direction and superintendence by an officer of the Court appointed by him in this behalf. (2) The record shall, if practicable, be in the language in which the accused is examined or, if that is not practicable, in the language of the Court. 25 (3) The record shall be shown or read to the accused, or, if he does not understand the language in which it is written, shall be interpreted to him in a language which he understands, and he shall be at liberty to explain or add to his answers. (4) It shall thereafter be signed by the accused and by the Magistrate or presiding Judge, who shall certify under his own hand that the examination was taken in his presence 30 and hearing and that the record contains a full and true account of the statement made by the accused: Provided that where the accused is in custody and is examined through electronic communication, his signature shall be taken within seventy-two hours of such examination. (5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to the examination of an accused 35 person in the course of a summary trial. Interpreter to 317. When the services of an interpreter are required by any Criminal Court for the be bound to interpretation of any evidence or statement, he shall be bound to state the true interpretation interpret of such evidence or statement. truthfully. Record in 318. Every High Court may, by general rule, prescribe the manner in which the evidence 40 High Court. of witnesses and the examination of the accused shall be taken down in cases coming before it, and such evidence and examination shall be taken down in accordance with such rule. B.—Commissions for the examination of witnesses When 319. (1) Whenever, in the course of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this 45 attendance of Sanhita, it appears to a Court or Magistrate that the examination of a witness is necessary witness may be for the ends of justice, and that the attendance of such witness cannot be procured without dispensed with an amount of delay, expense or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of the case, and commission issued. would be unreasonable, the Court or Magistrate may dispense with such attendance and may issue a commission for the examination of the witness in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter: Provided that where the examination of the President or the Vice-President of India or 5 the Governor of a State or the Administrator of a Union territory as a witness is necessary for the ends of Justice, a commission shall be issued for the examination of such a witness. (2) The Court may, when issuing a commission for the examination of a witness for the prosecution, direct that such amount as the Court considers reasonable to meet the expenses of the accused, including the pleader's fees, be paid by the prosecution. 10 320. (1) If the witness is within the territories to which this Sanhita extends, the Commission commission shall be directed to the Chief Judicial Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction to whom to be issued. the witness is to be found. (2) If the witness is in India, but in a State or an area to which this Sanhita does not extend, the commission shall be directed to such Court or officer as the Central Government 15 may, by notification, specify in this behalf. (3) If the witness is in a country or place outside India and arrangements have been made by the Central Government with the Government of such country or place for taking the evidence of witnesses in relation to criminal matters, the commission shall be issued in such form, directed to such Court or officer, and sent to such authority for transmission as 20 the Central Government may, by notification, prescribed in this behalf. 321. Upon receipt of the commission, the Chief Judicial Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate Execution of as he may appoint in this behalf, shall summon the witness before him or proceed to the commissions. place where the witness is, and shall take down his evidence in the same manner, and may for this purpose exercise the same powers, as in trials or warrant-cases under this Sanhita. 25 322. (1) The parties to any proceeding under this Sanhita in which a commission is Parties may issued may respectively forward any interrogatories in writing which the Court or Magistrate examine witnesses. directing the commission may think relevant to the issue, and it shall be lawful for the Magistrate, Court or officer to whom the commission, is directed, or to whom the duty of executing it is delegated, to examine the witness upon such interrogatories. 30 (2) Any such party may appear before such magistrate, Court or Officer by pleader, or if not in custody, in person, and may examine, cross-examine and re-examine the said witness. 323. (1) After any commission issued under section 310 has been duly executed, it Return of shall be returned, together with the deposition of the witness examined thereunder, to the commission. 35 Court or Magistrate issuing the commission; and the commission, the return thereto and the deposition shall be open at all reasonable times to inspection of the parties, and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in the case by either party, and shall form part of the record. (2) Any deposition so taken, if it satisfies the conditions specified by section 27 of 40 the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023, may also be received in evidence at any subsequent stage of the case before another Court. 324. In every case in which a commission is issued under section 319, the inquiry, trial Adjournment or other proceeding may be adjourned for a specified time reasonably sufficient for the of proceeding. execution and return of the commission. 45 325. (1) The provisions of section 321 and so much of section 322 and section 323 as Execution of relate to the execution of a commission and its return shall apply in respect of commissions foreign issued by any of the Courts, Judges or Magistrates hereinafter mentioned as they apply to commissions. commissions issued under section 319. (2) The Courts, Judges and Magistrates referred to in sub-section (1) are— (a) any such Court, Judge or Magistrate exercising jurisdiction within an area in India to which this Sanhita does not extend, as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf; (b) any Court, Judge or Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in any such country 5 or place outside India, as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, and having authority, under the law in force in that country or place, to issue commissions for the examination of witnesses in relation to criminal matters. Deposition of 326. (1) The deposition of civil surgeon or other medical witness, taken and attested medical by a Magistrate in the presence of the accused, or taken on commission under this Chapter, 10 witness. may be given in evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita, although the deponent is not called as a witness. (2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution or the accused, summon and examine any such deponent as to the subject-matter of his deposition. 15 Identification 327. (1) Any document purporting to be a report of identification under the hand of report of an Executive Magistrate in respect of a person or property may be used as evidence in any Magistrate. inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita, although such Magistrate is not called as a witness: Provided that where such report contains a statement of any suspect or witness to 20 which the provisions of section 19, section 26, section 27, section 158 or section 160 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023, apply, such statement shall not be used under this sub-section except in accordance with the provisions of those sections. (2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution or of the accused, summon and examine such Magistrate as to the subject-matter of the said 25 report. Evidence of 328. (1) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of any such officer officers of the of any Mint or of any Note Printing Press or of any Security Printing Press (including the Mint. officer of the Controller of Stamps and Stationery) or of any Forensic Department or Division of Forensic Science Laboratory or any Government Examiner of Questioned Documents or 30 any State Examiner of Questioned Documents as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, upon any matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination and report in the course of any proceeding under this Sanhita, may be used as evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita, although such officer is not called as a witness. 35 (2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine any such officer as to the subject-matter of his report: Provided that no such officer shall be summoned to produce any records on which the report is based. (3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 129 and 130 of the Bharatiya 40 Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023, no such officer shall, except with the permission of the General Manager or any officer in charge of any Mint or of any Note Printing Press or of any Security Printing Press or of any Forensic Department or any officer in charge of the Forensic Science Laboratory or of the Government Examiner of Questioned Documents Organisation or of the State Examiner of Questioned Documents Organisation, as the case may be, be 45 permitted— (a) to give any evidence derived from any unpublished official records on which the report is based; or (b) to disclose the nature or particulars of any test applied by him in the course of the examination of the matter or thing. 329. (1) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of a Government Reports of scientific expert to whom this section applies, upon any matter or thing duly submitted to certain 5 him for examination or analysis and report in the course of any proceeding under this Government scientific Sanhita, may be used as evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita. experts. (2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine any such expert as to the subject-matter of his report. (3) Where any such expert is summoned by a Court, and he is unable to attend 10 personally, he may, unless the Court has expressly directed him to appear personally, depute any responsible officer working with him to attend the Court, if such officer is conversant with the facts of the case and can satisfactorily depose in Court on his behalf. (4) This section applies to the following Government scientific experts, namely:— (a) any Chemical Examiner or Assistant Chemical Examiner to Government; 15 (b) the Chief Controller of Explosives; (c) the Director of the Finger Print Bureau; (d) the Director, Haffkeine Institute, Bombay; (e) the Director, Deputy Director or Assistant Director of a Central Forensic Science Laboratory or a State Forensic Science Laboratory; 20 (f) the Serologist to the Government; (g) any other scientific expert specified or certified, by notification, by the State Government or the Central Government for this purpose. 330. (1) Where any document is filed before any Court by the prosecution or the No formal accused, the particulars of every such document shall be included in a list and the prosecution proof of certain 25 or the accused or the advocate for the prosecution or the accused, if any, shall be called documents. upon to admit or deny the genuineness of each such document soon after supply of such documents and in no case later than thirty days after such supply: Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, relax the time limit with reasons to be recorded in writing: 30 Provided further that no expert shall be called to appear before the Court unless the report of such expert is disputed by any of the parties to the trial. (2) The list of documents shall be in such form as the State Government may, be rules, provide. (3) Where the genuineness of any document is not disputed, such document may be 35 read in evidence in inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita without proof of the signature of the person by whom it purports to be signed: Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, require such signature to by proved. 331. When any application is made to any Court in the course of any inquiry, trial or Affidavit in other proceeding under this Sanhita, and allegations are made therein respecting any public proof of 40 servant, the applicant may give evidence of the facts alleged in the application by affidavit, conduct of public and the Court may, if it thinks fit, order that evidence relating to such facts be so given. servants. 332. (1) The evidence of any person whose evidence is of a formal character may be Evidence of given by affidavit and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in any inquiry, formal character on trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita. affidavit. 45 (2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution or the accused, summon and examine any such person as to the facts contained in his affidavit. Authorities 333. (1) Affidavits to be used before any Court under this Sanhita may be sworn or before whom affirmed before— affidavits may be sworn. (a) any Judge or Judicial or Executive Magistrate; or (b) any Commissioner of Oaths appointed by a High Court or Court of Session; or 5 (c) any notary appointed under the Notaries Act, 1952. 53 of 1952. (2) Affidavits shall be confined to, and shall state separately, such facts as the deponent is able to prove from his own knowledge and such facts as he has reasonable ground to believe to be true, and in the latter case, the deponent shall clearly state the grounds of such belief. 10 (3) The Court may order any scandalous and irrelevant matter in the affidavit to be struck out or amended. Previous 334. In any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita, a previous conviction conviction or or acquittal may be proved, in addition to any other mode provided by any law for the time acquittal how being in force,— 15 proved. (a) by an extract certified under the hand of the officer having the custody of the records of the Court in which such conviction or acquittal was held, to be a copy of the sentence or order; or (b) in case of a conviction, either by a certificate signed by the officer in charge of the Jail in which the punishment or any part thereof was undergone, or by production 20 of the warrant of commitment under which the punishment was suffered, together with, in each of such cases, evidence as to the identity of the accused person with the person so convicted or acquitted. Record of 335. (1) If it is proved that an accused person has absconded, and that there is no evidence in immediate prospect of arresting him, the Court competent to try, or commit for trial, such 25 absence of person for the offence complained of may, in his absence, examine the witnesses (if any) accused. produced on behalf of the prosecution, and record their depositions and any such deposition may, on the arrest of such person, be given in evidence against him on the inquiry into, or trial for, the offence with which he is charged, if the deponent is dead or incapable of giving evidence or cannot be found or his presence cannot be procured without an amount of 30 delay, expense or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable. (2) If it appears that an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life has been committed by some person or persons unknown, the High Court or the Sessions Judge may direct that any Magistrate of the first class shall hold an inquiry and examine any 35 witnesses who can give evidence concerning the offence and any depositions so taken may be given in evidence against any person who is subsequently accused of the offence, if the deponent is dead or incapable of giving evidence or beyond the limits of India. Evidence of 336. Where any document or report prepared by a public servant, scientific expert, public medical officer or investigating officer is purported to be used as evidence in any inquiry, 40 servants, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita, and— experts, police officers in (i) such public servant, expert or officer is either transferred, retired, or died; or certain cases. (ii) such public servant, expert or officer cannot be found or is incapable of giving deposition; or (iii) securing presence of such public servant, expert or officer is likely to cause 45 delay in holding the inquiry, trial or other proceeding, the Court shall secure presence of successor officer of such public servant, expert, or officer who is holding that post at the time of such deposition to give deposition on such document or report. CHAPTER XXVII GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO INQUIRIES AND TRIALS 338. (1) A person who has once been tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction for an Person once offence and convicted or acquitted of such offence shall, while such conviction or acquittal convicted or acquitted not 5 remains in force, not be liable to be tried again for the same offence, nor on the same facts to be tried for for any other offence for which a different charge from the one made against him might have same offence. been made under sub-section (1) of section 244, or for which he might have been convicted under sub-section (2) thereof. (2) A person acquitted or convicted of any offence may be afterwards tried, with the 10 consent of the State Government, for any distinct offence for which a separate charge might have been made against him at the former trial under sub-section (1) of section 243. (3) A person convicted of any offence constituted by any act causing consequences which, together with such act, constituted a different offence from that of which he was convicted, may be afterwards tried for such last-mentioned offence, if the consequences 15 had not happened, or were not known to the Court to have happened, at the time when he was convicted. (4) A person acquitted convicted of any offence constituted by any acts may, notwithstanding such acquittal or conviction, be subsequently charged with, and tried for, any other offence constituted by the same acts which he may have committed if the Court 20 by which he was first tried was not competent to try the offence with which he is subsequently charged. (5) A person discharged under section 281 shall not be tried again for the same offence except with the consent of the Court by which he was discharged or of any other Court to which the first-mentioned Court is subordinate. 25 (6) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of section 26 of the General 10 of 1897. Clauses Act, 1897 or of section 208 of this Sanhita. Explanation.—The dismissal of a complaint, or the discharge of the accused, is not an acquittal for the purposes of this section. Illustrations. 30 (a) A is tried upon a charge of theft as a servant and aquitted. He cannot afterwards, while the acquittal remains in force, be charged with theft as a servant, or, upon the same facts, with theft simply, or with criminal breach of trust. (b) A is tried for causing grievous hurt and convicted. The person injured afterwards dies. A may be tried again for culpable homicide. 35 (c) A is charged before the Court of Session and convicted of the culpable homicide of B. A may not afterwards be tried on the same facts for the murder of B. (d) A is charged by a Magistrate of the first class with, and convicted by him of, voluntarily causing hurt to B. A may not afterwards be tried for voluntarily causing grievous hurt to B on the same facts, unless the case comes within sub-section (3) of this section. 40 (e) A is charged by a Magistrate of the second class with, and convicted by him of, theft of property from the person of B. A may subsequently be charged with, and tried for, robbery on the same facts. (f) A, B and C are charged by a Magistrate of the first class with, and convicted by him of, robbing D. A, B and C may afterwards be charged with, and tried for, dacoity on the same 45 facts. 338. (1) The Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of a case may Appearance appear and plead without any written authority before any Court in which that case is under by Public Prosecutors. inquiry, trial or appeal. (2) If in any such case any private person instructs his advocate to prosecute any person in any Court, the Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of the case shall conduct the prosecution, and the advocate so instructed shall act therein under the directions of the Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor, and may, with the permission of the Court, submit written arguments after the evidence is closed 5 in the case. Permission to 339. (1) Any Magistrate inquiring into or trying a case may permit the prosecution to conduct be conducted by any person other than a police officer below the rank of inspector; but no prosecution. person, other than the Advocate-General or Government Advocate or a Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor, shall be entitled to do so without such permission: 10 Provided that no police officer shall be permitted to conduct the prosecution if he has taken part in the investigation into the offence with respect to which the accused is being prosecuted. (2) Any person conducting the prosecution may do so personally or by an advocate. Right of 340. Any person accused of an offence before a Criminal Court, or against whom 15 person against proceedings are instituted under this Sanhita, may of right be defended by an advocate of whom his choice. proceedings are insituted to be defended. Legal aid to 341. (1) Where, in a trial or appeal before a Court, the accused is not represented by accused at an advocate, and where it appears to the Court that the accused has not sufficient means to State expense engage an advocate, the Court shall assign an advocate for his defence at the expense of 20 in certain the State. cases. (2) The High Court may, with the previous approval of the State Government, make rules providing for— (a) the mode of selecting advocates for defence under sub-section (1); (b) the facilities to be allowed to such advocates by the Courts; 25 (c) the fees payable to such advocates by the Government, and generally, for carrying out the purposes of sub-section (1). (3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that, as from such date as may be specified in the notification, the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply in relation to any class of trials before other Courts in the State as they apply in relation to 30 trials before Courts of Session. Procedure 342. (1) In this section, "corporation" means an incorporated company or other body when corporate, and includes a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. 21 of 1860. corporation or registered (2) Where a corporation is the accused person or one of the accused persons in an society is an inquiry or trial, it may appoint a representative for the purpose of the inquiry or trial and 35 accused. such appointment need not be under the seal of the corporation. (3) Where a representative of a corporation appears, any requirement of this Sanhita that anything shall be done in the presence of the accused or shall be read or stated or explained to the accused, shall be construed as a requirement that thing shall be done in the presence of the representative or read or stated or explained to the representative, and any 40 requirement that the accused shall be examined shall be construed as a requirement that the representative shall be examined. (4) Where a representative of a corporation does not appear, any such requirement as is referred to in sub-section (3) shall not apply. (5) Where a statement in writing purporting to be signed by the managing director of the corporation or by any person duly authorised by him (by whatever name called) having, or being one of the persons having the management of the affairs of the corporation to the effect that the person named in the statement has been appointed as the representative of 5 the corporation for the purposes of this section, is filed, the Court shall, unless the contrary is proved, presume that such person has been so appointed. (6) If a question arises as to whether any person, appearing as the representative of a corporation in an inquiry or trial before a Court is or is not such representative, the question shall be determined by the Court. 10 343. (1) With a view to obtaining the evidence of any person supposed to have been Tender of directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to an offence to which this section applies, the pardon to accomplice. Chief Judicial Magistrate at any stage of the investigation or inquiry into, or the trial of, the offence, and the Magistrate of the first class inquiring into or trying the offence, at any stage of the inquiry or trial, may tender a pardon to such person on condition of his making 15 a full and true disclosure of the whole of the circumstances within his knowledge relative to the offence and to every other person concerned, whether as principal or abettor, in the commission thereof. (2) This section applies to— (a) any offence triable exclusively by the Court of Session or by the Court of a 20 Special Judge appointed under any other law for the time being in force; (b) any offence punishable with imprisonment which may extend to seven years or with a more severe sentence. (3) Every Magistrate who tenders a pardon under sub-section (1) shall record— (a) his reasons for so doing; 25 (b) whether the tender was or was not accepted by the person to whom it was made, and shall, on application made by the accused, furnish him with a copy of such record free of cost. (4) Every person accepting a tender of pardon made under sub-section (1)— 30 (a) shall be examined as a witness in the Court of the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence and in the subsequent trial, if any; (b) shall, unless he is already on bail, be detained in custody until the termination of the trial. (5) Where a person has accepted a tender of pardon made under sub-section (1) and 35 has been examined under sub-section (4), the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence shall, without making any further inquiry in the case— (a) commit it for trial— (i) to the Court of Session if the offence is triable exclusively by that Court or if the Magistrate taking cognizance is the Chief Judicial Magistrate; 40 (ii) to a Court of Special Judge appointed under any other law for the time being in force, if the offence is triable exclusively by that Court; (b) in any other case, make over the case to the Chief Judicial Magistrate who shall try the case himself. 344. At any time after commitment of a case but before judgment is passed, the Court Power to 45 to which the commitment is made may, with a view to obtaining at the trial the evidence of direct tender of pardon. any person supposed to have been directly or indirectly concerned in, or privy to, any such offence, tender a pardon on the same condition to such person. Trial of 345. (1) Where, in regard to a person who has accepted a tender of pardon made person not under section 343 or section 344, the Public Prosecutor certifies that in his opinion such complying person has, either by wilfully concealing anything essential or by giving false evidence, not with conditions of complied with the condition on which the tender was made, such person may be tried for the pardon. offence in respect of which the pardon was so tendered or for any other offence of which he 5 appears to have been guilty in connection with the same matter, and also for the offence of giving false evidence: Provided that such person shall not be tried jointly with any of the other accused: Provided further that such person shall not be tried for the offence of giving false evidence except with the sanction of the High Court, and nothing contained in section 215 10 or section 379 shall apply to that offence. (2) Any statement made by such person accepting the tender of pardon and recorded by a Magistrate under section 183 or by a Court under sub-section (4) of section 343 may be given in evidence against him at such trial. (3) At such trial, the accused shall be entitled to plead that he has complied with the 15 condition upon which such tender was made; in which case it shall be for the prosecution to prove that the condition has not been complied with. (4) At such trial, the Court shall— (a) if it is a Court of Session, before the charge is read out and explained to the accused; 20 (b) if it is the Court of a Magistrate, before the evidence of the witnesses for the prosecution is taken, ask the accused whether he pleads that he has complied with the conditions on which the tender of pardon was made. (5) If the accused does so plead, the Court shall record the plea and proceed with the 25 trial and it shall, before passing judgment in the case, find whether or not the accused has complied with the conditions of the pardon, and, if it finds that he has so complied, it shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Sanhita, pass judgment of acquittal. Power to 346. (1) In every inquiry or trial the proceedings shall be continued from day-to-day postpone or basis until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the Court finds the 30 adjourn adjournment of the same beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be proceedings. recorded: Provided that when the inquiry or trial relates to an offence under section 64, section 66, section 67, section 68 and section 70 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 the inquiry or trial shall be completed within a period of two months from the date of filing of the 35 chargesheet. (2) If the Court, after taking cognizance of an offence, or commencement of trial, finds it necessary or advisable to postpone the commencement of, or adjourn, any inquiry or trial, it may, from time to time, for reasons to be recorded, postpone or adjourn the same on such terms as it thinks fit, for such time as it considers reasonable, and may by a warrant remand 40 the accused if in custody: Provided that no Court shall remand an accused person to custody under this section for a term exceeding fifteen days at a time: Provided further that when witnesses are in attendance, no adjournment or postponement shall be granted, without examining them, except for special reasons to be 45 recorded in writing: Provided also that no adjournment shall be granted for the purpose only of enabling the accused person to show cause against the sentence proposed to be imposed on him: Provided also that— (a) no adjournment shall be granted at the request of a party, except where the circumstances are beyond the control of that party; (b) where the circumstances are beyond the control of a party, not more than 5 two adjournments may be granted by the Court after hearing the objections of the other party and for the reasons to be recorded in writing; (c) the fact that the advocate of a party is engaged in another Court, shall not be a ground for adjournment; (d) where a witness is present in Court but a party or his advocate is not present 10 or the party or his advocate though present in Court, is not ready to examine or cross-examine the witness, the Court may, if thinks fit, record the statement of the witness and pass such orders as it thinks fit dispensing with the examination-in-chief or cross-examination of the witness, as the case may be. Explanation 1.—If sufficient evidence has been obtained to raise a suspicion that 15 the accused may have committed an offence, and it appears likely that further evidence may be obtained by a remand, this is a reasonable cause for a remand. Explanation 2.—The terms on which an adjournment or postponement may be granted include, in appropriate cases, the payment of costs by the prosecution or the accused. 347. (1) Any Judge or Magistrate may, at any stage of any inquiry, trial or other Local 20 proceeding, after due notice to the parties, visit and inspect any place in which an offence inspection. is alleged to have been committed, or any other place in which it is in his opinion necessary to view for the purpose of properly appreciating the evidence given at such inquiry or trial, and shall without unnecessary delay record a memorandum of any relevant facts observed at such inspection. 25 (2) Such memorandum shall form part of the record of the case and if the prosecutor, complainant or accused or any other party to the case, so desires, a copy of the memorandum shall be furnished to him free of cost. 348. Any Court may, at any stage of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Power to Sanhita, summon any person as a witness, or examine any person in attendance, though not summon material 30 summoned as a witness, or recall and re-examine any person already examined; and the witness, or Court shall summon and examine or recall and re-examine any such person if his evidence examine appears to it to be essential to the just decision of the case. person present. 349. If a Magistrate of the first class is satisfied that, for the purposes of any Power of investigation or proceeding under this Sanhita, it is expedient to direct any person, including Magistrate to 35 an accused person, to give specimen signatures or finger impressions or handwriting or order person to give voice sample, he may make an order to that effect and in that case the person to whom the specimen order relates shall be produced or shall attend at the time and place specified in such order signatures or and shall give his specimen signatures or finger impressions or handwriting or voice sample: handwriting. Provided that no order shall be made under this section unless the person has at some 40 time been arrested in connection with such investigation or proceeding: Provided further that the Magistrate may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, order any person to give such specimen or sample without him being arrested. 350. Subject to any rules made by the State Government, any Criminal Court may, if it Expenses of thinks fit, order payment, on the part of the Government, of the reasonable expenses of any complainants 45 complainant or witness attending for the purposes of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding and witnesses. before such Court under this Sanhita. Power to 351. (1) In every inquiry or trial, for the purpose of enabling the accused personally examine the to explain any circumstances appearing in the evidence against him, the Court— accused. (a) may at any stage, without previously warning the accused put such questions to him as the Court considers necessary; (b) shall, after the witnesses for the prosecution have been examined and before 5 he is called on for his defence, question him generally on the case: Provided that in a summon-case, where the Court has dispensed with the personal attendance of the accused, it may also dispense with his examination under clause (b). (2) No oath shall be administered to the accused when he is examined under 10 sub-section (1). (3) The accused shall not render himself liable to punishment by refusing to answer such questions, or by giving false answers to them. (4) The answers given by the accused may be taken into consideration in such inquiry or trial, and put in evidence for or against him in any other inquiry into, or trial for, 15 any other offence which such answers may tend to show he has committed. (5) The Court may take help of Prosecutor and Defence Counsel in preparing relevant questions which are to be put to the accused and the Court may permit filing of written statement by the accused as sufficient compliance of this section. Oral 352. (1) Any party to a proceeding may, as soon as may be, after the close of his 20 arguments and evidence, address concise oral arguments, and may, before he concludes the oral arguments, memorandum if any, submit a memorandum to the Court setting forth concisely and under distinct headings, of arguments. the arguments in support of his case and every such memorandum shall form part of the record. (2) A copy of every such memorandum shall be simultaneously furnished to the 25 opposite party. (3) No adjournment of the proceedings shall be granted for the purpose of filing the written arguments unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers it necessary to grant such adjournment. (4) The Court may, if it is of opinion that the oral arguments are not concise or 30 relevant, regulate such arguments. Accused 353. (1) Any person accused of an offence before a Criminal Court shall be a competent person to be witness for the defence and may give evidence on oath in disproof of the charges made competent against him or any person charged together with him at the same trial: witness. Provided that— 35 (a) he shall not be called as a witness except on his own request in writing; (b) his failure to give evidence shall not be made the subject of any comment by any of the parties or the Court or give rise to any presumption against himself or any person charged together with him that the same trial. (2) Any person against whom proceedings are instituted in any Criminal Court under 40 section 101, or section 126 or section 127, or section 128, or section 129, or under Chapter X or under Part B, Part C or Part D of Chapter XI, may offer himself as a witness in such proceedings: Provided that in proceedings under section 127, section 128, or section 129, the failure of such person to give evidence shall not be made the subject of any comment by 45 any of the parties or the Court or give rise to any presumption against him or any other person proceeded against together with him at the same inquiry. 354. Except as provided in sections 343 and 344, no influence, by means of any No influence promise or threat or otherwise, shall be used to an accused person to induce him to disclose to be used to induce or withhold any matter within his knowledge. disclosure. 355. (1) At any stage of an inquiry or trial under this Sanhita, if the Judge or Magistrate Provision for 5 is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded, that the personal attendance of the accused before inquiries and trial being held the Court is not necessary in the interests of justice, or that the accused persistently in the absence disturbs the proceedings in Court, the Judge or Magistrate may, if the accused is represented of accused in by an advocate, dispense with his attendance and proceed with such inquiry or trial in his certain cases. absence, and may, at any subsequent stage of the proceedings, direct the personal attendance 10 of such accused. (2) If the accused in any such case is not represented by an advocate, or if the Judge or Magistrate considers his personal attendance necessary, he may, if he thinks fit and for reasons to be recorded by him, either adjourn such inquiry or trial, or order that the case of such accused be taken up or tried separately. 15 Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, personal attendance of the accused includes attendance through audio video electronic means. 356. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Sanhita or in any other law for Inquiry trial or the time being in force, when a person declared as a proclaimed offender, whether or not judgment in charged jointly, has absconded to evade trial and there is no immediate prospect of arresting absentia of proclaimed 20 him, it shall be deemed to operate as a waiver of the right of such person to be present and offender. tried in person, and the Court shall, after recording reasons in writing, in the interest of justice, proceed with the trial in the like manner and with like effect as if he was present, under this Sanhita and pronounce the judgment: Provided that the Court shall not commence the trial unless a period of ninety days 25 has lapsed from the date of framing of the charge. (2) The Court shall ensure that the following procedure has been complied with before proceeding under sub-section (1) namely:— (i) issuance of execution of two consecutive warrants of arrest within the interval of atleast thirty days; 30 (ii) publish in a national or local daily newspaper circulating in the place of his last known address of residence, requiring the proclaimed offender to appear before the Court for trial and informing him that in case he fails to appear within thirty days from the date of such publication, the trial shall commence in his absence; (iii) inform his relative or friend, if any, about the commencement of the trial; 35 and (iv) affix information about the commencement of the trial on some conspicuous part of the house or homestead in which such person ordinarily resides and display in the police station of the district of his last known address of residence. (3) Where the proclaimed offender is not represented by any advocate, he shall be 40 provided with an advocate for his defence at the expense of the State. (4) Where the Court, competent to try the case or commit for trial, has examined any witnesses for prosecution and recorded their depositions, such depositions shall be given in evidence against such proclaimed offender on the inquiry into, or in trial for, the offence with which he is charged: 45 Provided that if the proclaimed offender is arrested and produced or appears before the Court during such trial, the Court may, in the interest of justice, allow him to examine any evidence which may have been taken in his absence. (5) Where a trial is related to a person under this section, the deposition and examination of the witness, may, as far as practicable, be recorded by audio-video electronic means preferably mobile phone and such recording shall be kept in such manner as the Court may direct. (6) In prosecution for offences under this Sanhita, voluntary absence of accused 5 after the trial has commenced under sub-section (1) shall not prevent continuing the trial including the pronouncement of the judgment even if he is arrested and produced or appears at the conclusion of such trial. (7) No appeal shall lie against the judgment under this section unless the proclaimed offender presents himself before the Court of appeal: 10 Provided that no appeal against conviction shall lie after the expiry of three years from the date of the judgment. (8) The State may, by notification, extend the provisions of this section to any absconder mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 84 of this Sanhita. 357. If the accused, though not a person with mental illness, cannot be made to 15 Procedure where accused understand the proceedings, the Court may proceed with the inquiry or trial; and, in the does not case of a Court other than a High Court, if such proceedings result in a conviction, the understand proceedings shall be forwarded to the High Court with a report of the circumstances of the proceedings. case, and the High Court shall pass thereon such order as it thinks fit. Power to 358. (1) Where, in the course of any inquiry into, or trial of, an offence, it appears from 20 proceed the evidence that any person not being the accused has committed any offence for which against other such person could be tried together with the accused, the Court may proceed against such persons person for the offence which he appears to have committed. appearing to be guilty of (2) Where such person is not attending the Court, he may be arrested or summoned, offence. as the circumstances of the case may require, for the purpose aforesaid. 25 (3) Any person attending the Court, although not under arrest or upon a summons, may be detained by such Court for the purpose of the inquiry into, or trial of, the offence which he appears to have committed. (4) Where the Court proceeds against any person under sub-section (1), then— (a) the proceedings in respect of such person shall be commenced afresh, and 30 the witnesses re-heard; (b) subject to the provisions of clause (a), the case may proceed as if such person had been an accused person when the Court took cognizance of the offence upon which the inquiry or trial was commenced. Compounding 359. (1) The offences punishable under the sections of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 35 of offences. 2023 specified in the first two columns of the Table next following may be compounded by the persons mentioned in the third column of that Table:— TABLE Offence Section of the Bharatiya Person by whom offence Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 applicable may be compounded 40 1 2 3 Uttering words, etc., with 300 The person whose religious deliberate intent to wound feelings are intended to the religious feelings of be wounded. any person. 45 Voluntarily causing hurt. 113(2) The person to whom the hurt is caused. 1 2 3 Voluntarily causing hurt 120(1) Ditto. on provocation. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt 120(2) The person to whom the hurt 5 on grave and sudden provocation. is caused. Wrongfully restraining or 124(2) The person restrained or confining any person. confined. Wrongfully confining a person 125(3) The person confined. for three days or more. 10 Wrongfully confining a person 125(4) Ditto. for ten days or more. Wrongfully confining a person 125(6) The person confined. in secret. Assault or use of criminal force. 129, 131 The person assaulted or to 15 whom criminal force is used. House-trespassing or house- 329(6) Person in possession of breaking after sunset or property trespassed upon. before sunrise. Theft. 301(2) The owner of the property 20 stolen. Dishonest misappropriation 312 The owner of the property of property. misappropriated. Criminal breach of trust by a 314(3) The owner of the property in carrier, wharfinger, etc. respect of which the breach of 25 trust has been committed. Dishonestly receiving stolen 315(2) The owner of the property property knowing it to be stolen. stolen. Assisting in the concealment or 315(5) Ditto. disposal of stolen property, 30 knowing it to be stolen. Cheating. 316(2) The person cheated. Cheating by personation. 317(2) Ditto. Fraudulent removal or concealment 318 The creditors who are affected of property, etc., to prevent thereby. 35 distribution among creditors. Fraudulently preventing from 319 Ditto. being made available for his creditors a debt or demand due to the offender. 40 Fraudulent execution of deed of 320 The person affected thereby. transfer containing false statement of consideration. Fraudulent removal or concealment 321 Ditto. of property. 1 2 3 Mischief, when the only loss or 322(2), The person to whom the loss damage caused is loss or damage 322(4) or damage is caused. to a private person. Mischief by killing or maiming animal. 323 The owner of the animal. 5 Mischief by injury to works of 324(a) The person to whom the loss irrigation by wrongfully diverting or damage is caused. water when the only loss or damage caused is loss or damage to private person. 10 Criminal trespass. 327(3) The person in possession of the property trespassed upon. House-trespass. 327(4) Ditto. House-trespass to commit an 330(c) The person in possession of offence (other than theft) the house trespassed upon. 15 punishable with imprisonment. Using a false trade or property mark. 343(3) The person to whom loss or injury is caused by such use. Counterfeiting a property mark 345(1) Ditto. used by another. 20 Selling goods marked with a 347 Ditto. counterfeit property mark. Breach of contract to attend on and 355 The person with whom the supply wants of helpless person. offender has contracted. Enticing or taking away or detaining 83 The husband of the woman 25 with criminal intent a married woman. and the woman. Defamation. 354(2) The person defamed. Printing or engraving matter, 354(3) Ditto. knowing it to be defamatory. Sale of printed or engraved 354(4) Ditto. substance containing defamatory matter, knowing it to contain such matter. Insult intended to provoke a 350 The person insulted. breach of the peace. 35 Criminal intimidation. 349(2) The person intimidated. Inducing person to believe himself 352 The person induced. an object of divine displeasure. (2) The offences punishable under the sections of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita specified in the first two columns of the Table next following may, with the permission of the 40 Court before which any prosecution for such offence is pending, be compounded by the persons mentioned in the third column of that Table:— Table Offence Section of the Bharatiya Person by whom offence Nyaya Sanhita applicable may be compounded 1 2 3 Causing miscarriage. 86 The woman to whom miscarriage is caused. Voluntarily causing 115(2) The person to whom hurt is grievous hurt. caused. Causing hurt by doing an 123(a) Ditto. 10 act so rashly and negligently as to endanger human life or the personal safety of others. Causing grievous hurt by 123(b) Ditto. doing an act so rashly and 15 negligently as to endanger human life or the personal safety of others. Assault or criminal force in 133 The person assaulted or to attempting wrongfully to whom the force was used. 20 confine a person. Theft, by clerk or servant of 304 The owner of the property property in possession of master. stolen. Criminal breach of trust. 314(2) The owner of the property in respect of which breach of 25 trust has been committed. Criminal breach of trust by 314(4) The owner of the property in a clerk or servant. respect of which the breach of trust has been committed. Cheating a person whose 316(3) The person cheated. 30 interest the offender was bound, either by law or by legal contract, to protect. Cheating and dishonestly 316(4) The person cheated. inducing delivery of property 35 or the making, alteration or destruction of a valuable security. Marrying again during the 81(2) The husband or wife of the life-time of a husband or wife. person so marrying. Defamation. 354(2) The person defamed. 40 Word, gesture or act intended 78 The woman whom it was to insult the modesty of intended to insult or whose a woman. privacy was intruded upon. (3) When an offence is compoundable under this section, the abetment of such offence or an attempt to commit such offence (when such attempt is itself an offence) or where the accused is liable under sub-section (5) of section 3 or section 188 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, may be compounded in like manner. (4) (a) When the person who would otherwise be competent to compound an offence 5 under this section is under the age of eighteen years or has intellectual disability requiring high support needs or is a person with mental illness, any person competent to contract on his behalf may, with the permission of the Court, compound such offence. (b) When the person who would otherwise be competent to compound an offence under this section is dead, the legal representative, as defined in the Code of Civil 10 Procedure, 1908 of such person may, with the consent of the Court, compound such offence. 5 of 1908. (5) When the accused has been committed for trial or when he has been convicted and an appeal is pending, no composition for the offence shall be allowed without the leave of the Court to which he is committed, or, as the case may be, before which the appeal is to be heard. 15 (6) A High Court or Court of Session acting in the exercise of its powers of revision under section 442 may allow any person to compound any offence which such person is competent to compound under this section. (7) No offence shall be compounded if the accused is, by reason of a previous conviction, liable either to enhanced punishment or to a punishment of a different kind for 20 such offence. (8) The composition of an offence under this section shall have the effect of an acquittal of the accused with whom the offence has been compounded. (9) No offence shall be compounded except as provided by this section. Withdrawal 360. The Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of a case may, 25 from with the consent of the Court, at any time before the judgment is pronounced, withdraw prosecution. from the prosecution of any person either generally or in respect of any one or more of the offences for which he is tried; and, upon such withdrawal,— (a) if it is made before a charge has been framed, the accused shall be discharged in respect of such offence or offences; 30 (b) if it is made after a charge has been framed, or when under this Sanhita no charge is required, he shall be acquitted in respect of such offence or offences: Provided that where such offence— (i) was against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, or 35 (ii) was investigated under any Central Act, or (iii) involved the misappropriation or destruction of, or damage to, any property belonging to the Central Government, or (iv) was committed by a person in the service of the Central Government while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, 40 and the Prosecutor in charge of the case has not been appointed by the Central Government, he shall not, unless he has been permitted by the Central Government to do so, move the Court for its consent to withdraw from the prosecution and the Court shall, before according consent, direct the Prosecutor to produce before it the permission granted by the Central Government to withdraw from the prosecution: 45 Provided further that no Court shall allow such withdrawal without giving an opportunity of being heard to the victim in the case. 361. (1) If, in the course of any inquiry into an offence or a trial before a Magistrate in Procedure in any district, the evidence appears to him to warrant a presumption— cases which Magistrate (a) that he has no jurisdiction to try the case or commit it for trial, or cannot dispose of. (b) that the case is one which should be tried or committed for trial by some 5 other Magistrate in the district, or (c) that the case should be tried by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, he shall stay the proceedings and submit the case, with a brief report explaining its nature, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or to such other Magistrate, having jurisdiction, as the Chief Judicial Magistrate directs. 10 (2) The Magistrate to whom the case is submitted may, if so empowered, either try the case himself, or refer it to any Magistrate subordinate to him having jurisdiction, or commit the accused for trial. 362. If, in any inquiry into an offence or a trial before a Magistrate, it appears to him Procedure at any stage of the proceedings before signing the judgment that the case is one which when after commencement 15 ought to be tried by the Court of Session, he shall commit it to that Court under the of inquiry or provisions hereinbefore contained and thereupon the provisions of Chapter XIX shall trial, apply to the commitment so made. Magistrate finds case should be committed. 363. (1) Where a person, having been convicted of an offence punishable under Trial of Chapter XII or Chapter XVII of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, with imprisonment for a persons 20 term of three years or upwards, is again accused of any offence punishable under either of previously convicted of those Chapters with imprisonment for a term of three years or upwards, and the Magistrate offences before whom the case is pending is satisfied that there is ground for presuming that such against person has committed the offence, he shall be sent for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate coinage, or committed to the Court of Session, unless the Magistrate is competent to try the case and stamp-law or property. 25 is of opinion that he can himself pass an adequate sentence if the accused is convicted. (2) When any person is sent for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or committed to the Court of Session under sub-section (1), any other person accused jointly with him in the same inquiry or trial shall be similarly sent or committed, unless the Magistrate discharges such other person under section 262 or section 268, as the case may be. 30 364. (1) Whenever a Magistrate is of opinion, after hearing the evidence for the Procedure prosecution and the accused, that the accused is guilty, and that he ought to receive a when punishment different in kind from, or more severe than, that which such Magistrate is Magistrate cannot pass empowered to inflict, or, being a Magistrate of the second class, is of opinion that the sentence accused ought to be required to execute a bond under section 125, he may record the sufficiently 35 opinion and submit his proceedings, and forward the accused, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate severe. to whom he is subordinate. (2) When more accused person than one are being tried together, and the Magistrate considers it necessary to proceed under sub-section (1), in regard to any of such accused, he shall forward all the accused, who are in his opinion guilty, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate. 40 (3) The Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom the proceedings are submitted may, if he thinks fit, examine the parties and recall and examine any witness who has already given evidence in the case and may call for and take any further evidence and shall pass such judgment, sentence or order in the case as he thinks fit, and is according to law. 365. (1) Whenever any Judge or Magistrate, after having heard and recorded the Conviction or 45 whole or any part of the evidence in any enquiry or a trial, ceases to exercise jurisdiction commitment therein and is succeeded by another Judge or Magistrate who has and who exercises such on evidence partly recorded jurisdiction, the Judge or Magistrate so succeeding may act on the evidence so recorded by by one his predecessor, or partly recorded by his predecessor and partly recorded by himself: Magistrate and partly by another. Provided that if the succeeding Judge or Magistrate is of the opinion that further examination of any of the witnesses whose evidence has already been recorded is necessary in the interests of justice, he may re-summon any such witness, and after such further examination, cross-examination and re-examination, if any, as he may permit, the witness shall be discharged. 5 (2) When a case is transferred under the provisions of this Sanhita from one Judge to another Judge or from one Magistrate to another Magistrate, the former shall be deemed to cease to exercise jurisdiction therein, and to be succeeded by the latter, within the meaning of sub-section (1). (3) Nothing in this section applies to summary trials or to cases in which proceedings 10 have been stayed under section 361 or in which proceedings have been submitted to a superior Magistrate under section 364. Court to be 366. (1) The place in which any Criminal Court is held for the purpose of inquiring into open. or trying any offence shall be deemed to be an open Court, to which the public generally may have access, so far as the same can conveniently contain them: 15 Provided that the presiding Judge or Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, order at any stage of any inquiry into, or trial of, any particular case, that the public generally, or any particular person, shall not have access to, or be or remain in, the room or building used by the Court. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the inquiry into and trial 20 of rape or an offence under section 64, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70 or section 71 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or under sections 4, 6, 8 or section 10 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 shall be conducted in camera: 32 of 2012. Provided that the presiding Judge may, if he thinks fit, or on an application made by either of the parties, allow any particular person to have access to, or be or remain in, the 25 room or building used by the Court: Provided further that in camera trial shall be conducted as far as practicable by a woman Judge or Magistrate. (3) Where any proceedings are held under sub-section (2), it shall not be lawful for any person to print or publish any matter in relation to any such proceedings except with 30 the previous permission of the Court: Provided that the ban on printing or publication of trial proceedings in relation to an offence of rape may be lifted, subject to maintaining confidentiality of name and address of the parties. CHAPTER XXVIII 35 PROVISONS AS TO ACCUSED PERSONS WITH MENTAL ILLNESS Procedure in 367. (1) When a Magistrate holding an inquiry has reason to believe that the person case of against whom the inquiry is being held is of person with mental illness and consequently accused being incapable of making his defence, the Magistrate shall inquire into the fact of such mental person with mental illness. illness, and shall cause such person to be examined by the civil surgeon of the district or 40 such other medical person as the State Government may direct, and thereupon shall examine such surgeon or other medical person as a witness, and shall reduce the examination to writing. (2) If the civil surgeon finds the accused to be a person with mental illness, he shall refer such person to a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist of Government hospital or 45 Government medical college for care, treatment and prognosis of the condition and the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, as the case may be, shall inform the Magistrate whether the accused is suffering from mental illness: Provided that if the accused is aggrieved by the information given by the psychiatric or clinical psychologist, as the case may be, to the Magistrate, he may prefer an appeal before the Medical Board which shall consist of— (a) head of psychiatry unit in the nearest Government hospital; and 5 (b) a faculty member in psychiatry in the nearest Government medical college. (3) Pending such examination and inquiry, the Magistrate may deal with such person in accordance with the provisions of section 369. (4) If the Magistrate is informed that the person referred to in sub-section (2) has mental illness, the Magistrate shall further determine whether the mental illness renders the 10 accused incapable of entering defence and if the accused is found so incapable, the Magistrate shall record a finding to that effect, and shall examine the record of evidence produced by the prosecution and after hearing the advocate of the accused but without questioning the accused, if he finds that no prima facie case is made out against the accused, he shall, instead of postponing the enquiry, discharge the accused and deal with 15 him in the manner provided under section 369: Provided that if the Magistrate finds that a prima facie case is made out against the accused in respect of whom a finding of mental illness is arrived at, he shall postpone the proceeding for such period, as in the opinion of the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, is required for the treatment of the accused, and order the accused to be dealt with as provided 20 under section 369. (5) If the Magistrate is informed that the person referred to in sub-section (2) is a person with mental illness, the Magistrate shall further determine whether the mental illness renders the accused incapable of entering defence, and if the accused is found so incapable, the Magistrate shall order closure of the inquiry and deal with the accused in the manner 25 provided under section 369. 368. (1) If at the trial of any person before a Magistrate or Court of Session, it appears Procedure in to the Magistrate or Court that such person is suffering from mental illness and consequently case of person with mental incapable of making his defence, the Magistrate or Court shall, in the first instance, try the illness tried fact of such mental illness and incapacity, and if the Magistrate or Court, after considering before Court. 30 such medical and other evidence as may be produced before him or it, is satisfied of the fact, he or it shall record a finding to that effect and shall postpone further proceedings in the case. (2) If during trial, the Magistrate or Court of Sessions finds the accused to be a person with mental illness, he or it shall refer such person to a psychiatrist or clinical 35 psychologist for care and treatment, and the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, as the case may be, shall report to the Magistrate or Court whether the accused is suffering from mental illness: Provided that if the accused is aggrieved by the information given by the psychiatric or clinical psychologist, as the case may be, to the Magistrate, he may prefer an appeal 40 before the Medical Board which shall consist of— (a) head of psychiatry unit in the nearest Government hospital; and (b) a faculty member in psychiatry in the nearest medical college. (3) If the Magistrate or Court is informed that the person referred to in sub-section (2) is a person with mental illness, the Magistrate or Court shall further determine whether the 45 mental illness renders the accused incapable of entering defence and if the accused is found so incapable, the Magistrate or Court shall record a finding to that effect and shall examine the record of evidence produced by the prosecution and after hearing the advocate of the accused but without questioning the accused, if the Magistrate or Court finds that no prima facie case is made out against the accused, he or it shall, instead of postponing the 50 trial, discharge the accused and deal with him in the manner provided under section 369: Provided that if the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima facie case is made out against the accused in respect of whom a finding of mental illness is arrived at, he shall postpone the trial for such period, as in the opinion of the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, is required for the treatment of the accused. (4) If the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima facie case is made out against the 5 accused and he is incapable of entering defence by reason of mental illness, he or it shall not hold the trial and order the accused to be dealt with in accordance with section 369. Release of 369. (1) Whenever a person if found under section 367 or section 368 to be incapable person with of entering defence by reason of mental illness, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, mental illness shall, whether the case is one in which bail may be taken or not, order release of such person 10 pending on bail: investigation or trial. Provided that the accused is suffering from mental illness which does not mandate in-patient treatment and a friend or relative undertakes to obtain regular out-patient psychiatric treatment from the nearest medical facility and to prevent from doing injury to himself or to any other person. 15 (2) If the case is one in which, in the opinion of the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, bail cannot be granted or if an appropriate undertaking is not given, he or it shall order the accused to be kept in such a place where regular psychiatric treatment can be provided, and shall report the action taken to the State Government: Provided that no order for the detention of the accused in a public mental health 20 establishment shall be made otherwise than in accordance with such rules as the State Government may have made under the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017. 10 of 2017. (3) Whenever a person is found under section 367 or section 368 to be incapable of entering defence by reason of mental illness, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, shall keeping in view the nature of the act committed and the extent of mental illness, further 25 determine if the release of the accused can be ordered: Provided that— (a) if on the basis of medical opinion or opinion of a specialist, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, decide to order discharge of the accused, as provided under section 367 or section 368, such release may be ordered, if sufficient security is 30 given that the accused shall be prevented from doing injury to himself or to any other person; (b) if the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, is of the opinion that discharge of the accused cannot be ordered, the transfer of the accused to a residential facility for persons with mental illness may be ordered wherein the accused may be provided 35 care and appropriate education and training. Resumption of 370. (1) Whenever an inquiry or a trial is postponed under section 367 or section 368, inquiry or the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, may at any time after the person concerned has trial. ceased to be suffering from mental illness, resume the inquiry or trial and require the accused to appear or be brought before such Magistrate or Court. 40 (2) When the accused has been released under section 369, and the sureties for his appearance produce him to the officer whom the Magistrate or Court appoints in this behalf, the certificate of such officer that the accused is capable of making his defence shall be receivable in evidence. Procedure on 371. (1) If, when the accused appears or is again brought before the Magistrate or 45 accused Court, as the case may be, the Magistrate or Court considers him capable of making his appearing defence, the inquiry or trial shall proceed. before Magistrate or (2) If the Magistrate or Court considers the accused to be still incapable of making his Court. defence, the Magistrate or Court shall act according to the provisions of section 367 or section 368, as the case may be, and if the accused is found to be suffering from mental 50 illness and consequently incapable of making his defence, shall deal with such accused in accordance with the provisions of section 369. 372. When the accused appears to be of sound mind at the time of inquiry or trial, and When accused the Magistrate is satisfied from the evidence given before him that there is reason to believe appears to have been of that the accused committed an act, which, if he had not been having a mental illness, would sound mind. have been an offence, and that he was, at the time when the act was committed, by reason 5 of mental illness, incapable of knowing the nature of the act or that it was wrong or contrary to law, the Magistrate shall proceed with the case, and, if the accused ought to be tried by the Court of Session, commit him for trial before the Court of Session. 373. Whenever any person is acquitted upon the ground that, at the time at which he Judgment of is alleged to have committed an offence, he was, by reason of mental illness, incapable of acquittal on ground of 10 knowing the nature of the act alleged as constituting the offence, or that it was wrong or mental illness. contrary to law, the finding shall state specifically whether he committed the act or not. 374. (1) Whenever the finding states that the accused person committed the act Person alleged, the Magistrate or Court before whom or which the trial has been held, shall, if such acquitted on ground of act would, but for the incapacity found, have constituted an offence,— mental illness 15 (a) order such person to be detained in safe custody in such place and manner to be detained as the Magistrate or Court thinks fit; or in safe custody. (b) order such person to be delivered to any relative or friend of such person. (2) No order for the detention of the accused in a public mental health establishment shall be made under clause (a) of sub-section (1) otherwise than in accordance with such 10 of 2017. 20 rules as the State Government may have made under the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017. (3) No order for the delivery of the accused to a relative or friend shall be made under clause (b) of sub-section (1) except upon the application of such relative or friend and on his giving security to the satisfaction of the Magistrate or Court that the person delivered shall— 25 (a) be properly taken care of and prevented from doing injury to himself or to any other person; (b) be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places, as the State Government may direct. (4) The Magistrate or Court shall report to the State Government the action taken 30 under sub-section (1). 375. The State Government may empower the officer-in-charge of the jail in which a Power of State person is confined under the provisions of section 369 or section 374 to discharge all or any Government to empower of the functions of the Inspector-General of Prisons under section 376 or section 377. officer-in- charge to discharge. 376. If a person with mental illness is detained under the provisions of Procedure 35 sub-section (2) of section 369, and in the case of a person detained in a jail, the where prisoner with mental Inspector-General of Prisons, or, in the case of a person detained in a public mental health illness is establishment, the Mental Health Review Board constituted under the Mental Healthcare reported Act, 2017, shall certify that, in his or their opinion, such person is capable of making his capable of defence, he shall be taken before the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, at such time making his defence. 40 as the Magistrate or Court appoints, and the Magistrate or Court shall deal with such person under the provisions of section 371; and the certificate of such Inspector-General or visitors as aforesaid shall be receivable as evidence. 377. (1) If a person with mental illness is detained under the provisions of Procedure sub-section (2) of section 369, or section 374, and such Inspector-General or visitors shall where person with mental 45 certify that, in his or their judgment, he may be released without danger of his doing injury illness to himself or to any other person, the State Government may thereupon order him to be detained is released, or to be detained in custody, or to be transferred to a public mental health declared fit to establishment if he has not been already sent to such establishment; and, in case it orders be released. him to be transferred to public mental health establishment, may appoint a Commission, 50 consisting of a Judicial and two medical officers. (2) Such Commission shall make a formal inquiry into the state of mind of such person, take such evidence as is necessary, and shall report to the State Government, which may order his release or detention as it thinks fit. Delivery of 378. (1) Whenever any relative or friend of any person detained under the provisions person with of section 369 or section 374 desires that he shall be delivered to his care and custody, the 5 mental illness State Government may, upon the application of such relative or friend and on his giving to care of security to the satisfaction of such State Government, that the person delivered shall— relative or friend. (a) be properly taken care of and prevented from doing injury to himself or to any other person; (b) be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places, 10 as the State Government may direct; (c) in the case of a person detained under sub-section (2) of section 369, be produced when required before such Magistrate or Court, order such person to be delivered to such relative or friend. (2) If the person so delivered is accused of any offence, the trial of which has been 15 postponed by reason of his being of mental illness and incapable of making his defence, and the inspecting officer referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), certifies at any time to the Magistrate or Court that such person is capable of making his defence, such Magistrate or Court shall call upon the relative or friend to whom such accused was delivered to produce him before the Magistrate or Court; and, upon such production the Magistrate or 20 Court shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of section 371, and the certificate of the inspecting officer shall be receivable as evidence. CHAPTER XXIX PROVISIONS AS TO OFFENCES AFFECTING THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE Procedure in 379. (1) When, upon an application made to it in this behalf or otherwise, any Court 25 cases is of opinion that it is expedient in the interests of justice that an inquiry should be made mentioned in into any offence referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 215, which appears to section 215. have been committed in or in relation to a proceeding in that Court or, as the case may be, in respect of a document produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in that Court, such Court may, after such preliminary inquiry, if any, as it thinks necessary,— 30 (a) record a finding to that effect; (b) make a complaint thereof in writing; (c) send it to a Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction; (d) take sufficient security for the appearance of the accused before such Magistrate, or if the alleged offence is non-bailable and the Court thinks it necessary 35 so to do, send the accused in custody to such Magistrate; and (e) bind over any person to appear and give evidence before such Magistrate. (2) The power conferred on a Court by sub-section (1) in respect of an offence may, in any case where that Court has neither made a complaint under sub-section (1) in respect of that offence nor rejected an application for the making of such complaint, be exercised by 40 the Court to which such former Court is subordinate within the meaning of sub-section (4) of section 215. (3) A complaint made under this section shall be signed,— (a) where the Court making the complaint is a High Court, by such officer of the Court as the Court may appoint; 45 (b) in any other case, by the presiding officer of the Court or by such officer of the Court as the Court may authorise in writing in this behalf. (4) In this section, "Court" has the same meaning as in section 215. 380. (1) Any person on whose application any Court other than a High Court has Appeal. refused to make a complaint under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 379, or against whom such a complaint has been made by such Court, may appeal to the Court to which such former Court is subordinate within the meaning of sub-section (4) of 5 section 215, and the superior Court may thereupon, after notice to the parties concerned, direct the withdrawal of the complaint, or, as the case may be, making of the complaint which such former Court might have made under section 379, and, if it makes such complaint, the provisions of that section shall apply accordingly. (2) An order under this section, and subject to any such order, an order under 10 section 379, shall be final, and shall not be subject to revision. 381. Any Court dealing with an application made to it for filing a complaint under Power to section 379 or an appeal under section 380, shall have power to make such order as to costs order costs. as may be just. 382. (1) A Magistrate to whom a complaint is made under section 379 or section 380 Procedure of 15 shall, notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter XVI, proceed, as far as may be, to Magistrate deal with the case as if it were instituted on a police report. taking cognizance. (2) Where it is brought to the notice of such Magistrate, or of any other Magistrate to whom the case may have been transferred, that an appeal is pending against the decision arrived at in the judicial proceeding out of which the matter has arisen, he may, if he thinks 20 fit, at any stage, adjourn the hearing of the case until such appeal is decided. 383. (1) If, at the time of delivery of any judgment or final order disposing of any Summary judicial proceeding, a Court of Session or Magistrate of the first class expresses an opinion procedure for trial for giving to the effect that any witness appearing in such proceeding had knowingly or wilfully given false evidence. false evidence or had fabricated false evidence with the intention that such evidence should 25 be used in such proceeding, it or he may, if satisfied that it is necessary and expedient in the interest of justice that the witness should be tried summarily for giving or fabricating, as the case may be, false evidence, take cognizance of the offence and may, after giving the offender a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished for such offence, try such offender summarily and sentence him to imprisonment for a term 30 which may extend to three months, or to fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. (2) In every such case the Court shall follow, as nearly as may be practicable, the procedure prescribed for summary trials. (3) Nothing in this section shall affect the power of the Court to make a complaint 35 under section 379 for the offence, where it does not choose to proceed under this section. (4) Where, after any action is initiated under sub-section (1), it is made to appear to the Court of Session or Magistrate of the first class that an appeal or an application for revision has been preferred or filed against the judgment or order in which the opinion referred to in that sub-section has been expressed, it or he shall stay further proceedings of 40 the trial until the disposal of the appeal or the application for revision, as the case may be, and thereupon the further proceedings of the trial shall abide by the results of the appeal or application for revision. 384. (1) When any such offence as is described in section 209, section 211, Procedure in section 212, section 213 or section 265 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is committed in certain cases of contempt. 45 the view or presence of any Civil, Criminal, or Revenue Court, the Court may cause the offender to be detained in custody, and may, at any time before the rising of the Court or the same day, take cognizance of the offence and, after giving the offender a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished under this section, sentence the offender to fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, and, in default of payment of fine, 50 to simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, unless such fine be sooner paid. (2) In every such case the Court shall record the fact constituting the offence, with the statement (if any) made by the offender, as well as the finding and sentence. (3) If the offence is under section 265 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the record shall show the nature and stage of the judicial proceeding in which the Court interrupted or insulted was sitting, and the nature of the interruption or insult. 5 Procedure 385. (1) If the Court in any case considers that a person accused of any of the where Court offences referred to in section 384 and committed in its view or presence should be imprisoned considers that otherwise than in default of payment of fine, or that a fine exceeding two hundred rupees case should should be imposed upon him, or such Court is for any other reason of opinion that the case not be dealt with under should not be disposed of under section 384, such Court, after recording the facts 10 section 384. constituting the offence and the statement of the accused as hereinbefore provided, may forward the case to a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try the same, and may require security to be given for the appearance of such person before such Magistrate, or if sufficient security is not given, shall forward such person in custody to such Magistrate. (2) The Magistrate to whom any case is forwarded under this section shall proceed to 15 deal with, as far as may be, as if it were instituted on a police report. When 386. When the State Government so directs, any Registrar or any Sub-Registrar Registrar or appointed under the Registration Act, 1908, shall be deemed to be a Civil Court within the 16 of 1908. Sub-Registrar meaning of sections 384 and 385. to be deemed a Civil Court. Discharge of 387. When any Court has under section 384 adjudged an offender to punishment, or 20 offender on has under section 385 forwarded him to a Magistrate for trial, for refusing or omitting to do submission of anything which he was lawfully required to do or for any intentional insult or interruption, apology. the Court may, in its discretion, discharge the offender or remit the punishment on his submission to the order or requisition of such Court, or on apology being made to its satisfaction. 25 Imprisonment 388. If any witness or person called to produce a document or thing before a Criminal or commital Court refuses to answer such questions as are put to him or to produce any document or of person thing in his possession or power which the Court requires him to produce, and does not, refusing to after a reasonable opportunity has been given to him so to do, offer any reasonable excuse answer or produce for such refusal, such Court may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, sentence him to 30 document. simple imprisonment, or by warrant under the hand of the Presiding Magistrate or Judge commit him to the custody of an officer of the Court for any term not exceeding seven days, unless in the meantime, such person consents to be examined and to answer, or to produce the document or thing and in the event of his persisting in his refusal, he may be dealt with according to the provisions of section 384 or section 385. 35 Summary 389. (1) If any witness being summoned to appear before a Criminal Court is legally procedure for bound to appear at a certain place and time in obedience to the summons and without just punishment excuse neglects or refuses to attend at that place or time or departs from the place where he for non- has to attend before the time at which it is lawful for him to depart, and the Court before attendance by a witness in which the witness is to appear is satisfied that it is expedient in the interest of justice that 40 obedience to such a witness should be tried summarily, the Court may take cognizance of the offence and summons. after giving the offender an opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished under this section, sentence him to fine not exceeding five hundred rupees. (2) In every such case the Court shall follow, as nearly as may be practicable, the procedure prescribed for summary trials. 45 Appeals from 390. (1) Any person sentenced by any Court other than a High Court under section convictions 383, section 384, section 388, or section 389 may, notwithstanding anything contained in under sections this Sanhita appeal to the Court to which decrees or orders made in such Court are ordinarily 383, 384, 388 appealable. and 389. (2) The provisions of Chapter XXXI shall, so far as they are applicable, apply to appeals under this section, and the Appellate Court may alter or reverse the finding, or reduce or reverse the sentence appealed against. (3) An appeal from such conviction by a Court of Small Causes shall lie to the Court 5 of Session for the sessions division within which such Court is situate. (4) An appeal from such conviction by any Registrar or Sub-Registrar deemed to be a Civil Court by virtue of a direction issued under section 386 shall lie to the Court of Session for the sessions division within which the office of such Registrar or Sub-Registrar is situate. 10 391. Except as provided in sections 383, 384, 388 and 389, no Judge of a Criminal Court Certain Judges (other than a Judge of a High Court) or Magistrate shall try any person for any offence and Magistrates referred to in section 215, when such offence is committed before himself or in contempt of not to try his authority, or is brought under his notice as such Judge or Magistrate in the course of a certain judicial proceeding. offences when committed before themselves. 15 392. (1) The judgment in every trial in any Criminal Court or original jurisdiction shall Judgment. be pronounced in open Court by the presiding officer immediately after the termination of the trial or at some subsequent time not later than forty-five days of which notice shall be given to the parties or their advocates,— (a) by delivering the whole of the judgment; or 20 (b) by reading out the whole of the judgment; or (c) by reading out the operative part of the judgment and explaining the substance of the judgment in a language which is understood by the accused or his advocate. (2) Where the judgment is delivered under clause (a) of sub-section (1), the presiding officer shall cause it to be taken down in short-hand, sign the transcript and every page 25 thereof as soon as it is made ready, and write on it the date of the delivery of the judgment in open Court. (3) Where the judgment or the operative part thereof is read out under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1), as the case may be, it shall be dated and signed by the presiding officer in open Court, and if it is not written with his own hand, every page of the 30 judgment shall be signed by him. (4) Where the judgment is pronounced in the manner specified in clause (c) of sub-section (1), the whole judgment or a copy thereof shall be immediately made available for the perusal of the parties or their advocates free of cost: Provided that the Court shall, as far as practicable, upload the copy of the judgment 35 on its portal within a period of seven days from the date of judgment. (5) If the accused is in custody, he shall be brought up to hear the judgment pronounced either in person or through audio-video electronic means. (6) If the accused is not in custody, he shall be required by the Court to attend to hear the judgment pronounced, except where his personal attendance during the trial has been 40 dispensed with and the sentence is one of fine only or he is acquitted: Provided that where there are more accused persons than one, and one or more of them do not attend the Court on the date on which the judgment is to be pronounced, the presiding officer may, in order to avoid undue delay in the disposal of the case, pronounce the judgment notwithstanding their absence. (7) No judgment delivered by any Criminal Court shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of the absence of any party or his advocate on the day or from the place notified for the delivery thereof, or of any omission to serve, or defect in serving, on the parties or their advocates, or any of them, the notice of such day and place. (8) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit in any way the extent of the 5 provisions of section 513. Language and 393. (1) Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Sanhita, every judgment contents of referred to in section 392,— judgment. (a) shall be written in the language of the Court; (b) shall contain the point or points for determination, the decision thereon and 10 the reasons for the decision; (c) shall specify the offence (if any) of which, and the section of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or other law under which, the accused is convicted, and the punishment to which he is sentenced; (d) if it be a judgment of acquittal, shall state the offence of which the accused 15 is acquitted and direct that he be set at liberty. (2) When the conviction is under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and it is doubtful under which of two sections, or under which of two parts of the same section, of that Sanhita the offence falls, the Court shall distinctly express the same, and pass judgment in the alternative. 20 (3) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with death or, in the alternative, with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of years, the judgment shall state the reasons for the sentence awarded, and, in the case of sentence of death, the special reasons for such sentence. (4) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term of 25 one year or more, but the Court imposes a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three months, it shall record its reasons for awarding such sentence, unless the sentence is one of imprisonment till the rising of the Court or unless the case was tried summarily under the provisions of this Sanhita. (5) When any person is sentenced to death, the sentence shall direct that he be 30 hanged by the neck till he is dead. (6) Every order under section 136 or sub-section (2) of section 157 and every final order made under section 144, section 164 or section 166 shall contain the point or points for determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for the decision. Order for 394. (1) When any person, having been convicted by a Court in India of an offence 35 notifying punishable with imprisonment for a term of three years, or upwards, is again convicted of address of any offence punishable under any of those sections or Chapters with imprisonment for a previously term of three years or upwards by any Court other than that of a Magistrate of the second convicted offender. class, such Court may, if it thinks fit, at the time of passing a sentence of imprisonment on such person, also order that his residence and any change of, or absence from, such 40 residence after release be notified as hereinafter provided for a term not exceeding five years from the date of the expiration of such sentence. (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) with reference to the offences named therein, apply also to criminal conspiracies to commit such offences and to the abatement of such offences and attempts to commit them. 45 (3) If such conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, such order shall become void. (4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the High Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of revision. (5) The State Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this section relating to the notification of residence or change of, or absence from, 5 residence by released convicts. (6) Such rules may provide for punishment for the breach thereof and any person charged with a breach of any such rule may be tried by a Magistrate of competent jurisdiction in the district in which the place last notified by him as his place of residence is situated. 395. (1) When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a sentence (including a sentence Order to pay 10 of death) of which fine forms a part, the Court may, when passing judgment, order the whole compensation. or any part of the fine recovered to be applied— (a) in defraying the expenses properly incurred in the prosecution; (b) in the payment to any person of compensation for any loss or injury caused by the offence, when compensation is, in the opinion of the Court, recoverable by 15 such person in a Civil Court; (c) when any person is convicted of any offence for having caused the death of another person or of having abetted the commission of such an offence, in paying 13 of 1855. compensation to the persons who are, under the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855, entitled to recover damages from the person sentenced for the loss resulting to them from such 20 death; (d) when any person is convicted of any offence which includes theft, criminal misappropriation, criminal breach of trust, or cheating, or of having dishonestly received or retained, or of having voluntarily assisted in disposing of, stolen property knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen, in compensating any 25 bona fide purchaser of such property for the loss of the same if such property is restored to the possession of the person entitled thereto. (2) If the fine is imposed in a case which is subject to appeal, no such payment shall be made before the period allowed for presenting the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal be presented, before the decision of the appeal. 30 (3) When a Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court may, when passing judgment, order the accused person to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as may be specified in the order to the person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason of the act for which the accused person has been so sentenced. (4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the 35 High Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of revision. (5) At the time of awarding compensation in any subsequent civil suit relating to the same matter, the Court shall take into account any sum paid or recovered as compensation under this section. 396. (1) Every State Government in co-ordination with the Central Government shall Victim 40 prepare a scheme for providing funds for the purpose of compensation to the victim or his compensation dependents who have suffered loss or injury as a result of the crime and who require scheme. rehabilitation. (2) Whenever a recommendation is made by the Court for compensation, the District Legal Service Authority or the State Legal Service Authority, as the case may be, shall 45 decide the quantum of compensation to be awarded under the scheme referred to in sub-section (1). (3) If the trial Court, at the conclusion of the trial, is satisfied, that the compensation awarded under section 395 is not adequate for such rehabilitation, or where the cases end in acquittal or discharge and the victim has to be rehabilitated, it may make recommendation for compensation. (4) Where the offender is not traced or identified, but the victim is identified, and where no trial takes place, the victim or his dependents may make an application to the State or the District Legal Services Authority for award of compensation. 5 (5) On receipt of such recommendations or on the application under sub-section (4), the State or the District Legal Services Authority shall, after due enquiry award adequate compensation by completing the enquiry within two months. (6) The State or the District Legal Services Authority, as the case may be, to alleviate the suffering of the victim, may order for immediate first-aid facility or medical benefits to be 10 made available free of cost on the certificate of the police officer not below the rank of the officer in charge of the police station or a Magistrate of the area concerned, or any other interim relief as the appropriate authority deems fit. (7) The compensation payable by the State Government under this section shall be in addition to the payment of fine to the victim under section 67(4), section 68, section 70(1) 15 and section 70(2) of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. Treatment of 397. All hospitals, public or private, whether run by the Central Government, the State victims. Government, local bodies or any other person, shall immediately, provide the first-aid or medical treatment, free of cost, to the victims of any offence covered under section 122, section 64, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70, section 71 or section 122 of the 20 Bharatiya Nyaya, Sanhita, 2023 or under sections 4, 6, 8 or section 10 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, and shall immediately inform the police of such 32 of 2012. incident. Witness 398. Every State Government shall prepare and notify a Witness Protection Scheme protection for the State with a view to ensure protection of the witnesses. 25 scheme. Compensation 399. (1) Whenever any person causes a police officer to arrest another person, if it to persons appears to the Magistrate by whom the case is heard that there was no sufficient ground for groundlessly causing such arrest, the Magistrate may award such compensation, not exceeding one arrested. thousand rupees, to be paid by the person so causing the arrest to the person so arrested, for his loss of time and expenses in the matter, as the Magistrate thinks fit. 30 (2) In such cases, if more persons than one are arrested, the Magistrate may, in like manner, award to each of them such compensation, not exceeding one thousand rupees, as such Magistrate thinks fit. (3) All compensation awarded under this section may be recovered as if it were a fine, and, if it cannot be so recovered, the person by whom it is payable shall be sentenced to 35 simple imprisonment for such term not exceeding thirty days as the Magistrate directs, unless such sum is sooner paid. Order to pay 400. (1) Whenever any complaint of a non-cognizable offence is made to a Court, the costs in non- Court, if it convicts the accused, may, in addition to the penalty imposed upon him, order cognizable him to pay to the complainant, in whole or in part, the cost incurred by him in the prosecution, 40 cases. and may further order that in default of payment, the accused shall suffer simple imprisonment for a period not exceeding thirty days and such costs may include any expenses incurred in respect of process-fees, witnesses and advocate's fees which the Court may consider reasonable. (2) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the 45 High Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of revision. Order to release 401. (1) When any person not under twenty-one years of age is convicted of an on probation of offence punishable with fine only or with imprisonment for a term of seven years or less, or good conduct or when any person under twenty-one years of age or any woman is convicted of an offence after admonition. not punishable with death or imprisonment for life, and no previous conviction is proved against the offender, if it appears to the Court before which he is convicted, regard being had to the age, character or antecedents of the offender, and to the circumstances in which the offence was committed, that it is expedient that the offender should be released on 5 probation of good conduct, the Court may, instead of sentencing him at once to any punishment, direct that he be released on his entering into a bond, with or without sureties, to appear and receive sentence when called upon during such period (not exceeding three years) as the Court may direct, and in the meantime to keep the peace and be of good behavior: Provided that where any first offender is convicted by a Magistrate of the second 10 class not specially empowered by the High Court, and the Magistrate is of opinion that the powers conferred by this section should be exercised, he shall record his opinion to that effect, and submit the proceedings to a Magistrate of the first class, forwarding the accused to, or taking bail for his appearance before, such Magistrate, who shall dispose of the case in the manner provided by sub-section (2). 15 (2) Where proceedings are submitted to a Magistrate of the first class as provided by sub-section (1), such Magistrate may thereupon pass such sentence or make such order as he might have passed or made if the case had originally been heard by him, and, if he thinks further inquiry or additional evidence on any point to be necessary, he may make such inquiry or take such evidence himself or direct such inquiry or evidence to be made or taken. 20 (3) In any case in which a person is convicted of theft, theft in a building, dishonest misappropriation, cheating or any offence under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, punishable with not more than two years, imprisonment or any offence punishable with fine only and no previous conviction is proved against him, the Court before which he is so convicted may, if it thinks fit, having regard to the age, character, antecedents or physical or 25 mental condition of the offender and to the trivial nature of the offence or any extenuating circumstances under which the offence was committed, instead of sentencing him to any punishment, release him after due admonition. (4) An order under this section may be made by any Appellate Court or by the High Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of revision. 30 (5) When an order has been made under this section in respect of any offender, the High Court or Court of Session may, on appeal when there is a right of appeal to such Court, or when exercising its powers of revision, set aside such order, and in lieu thereof pass sentence on such offender according to law: Provided that the High Court or Court of Session shall not under this sub-section 35 inflict a greater punishment than might have been inflicted by the Court by which the offender was convicted. (6) The provisions of sections 140, 143 and 414 shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of sureties offered in pursuance of the provisions of this section. (7) The Court, before directing the release of an offender under sub-section (1), shall 40 be satisfied that an offender or his surety (if any) has a fixed place of abode or regular occupation in the place for which the Court acts or in which the offender is likely to live during the period named for the observance of the conditions. (8) If the Court which convicted the offender, or a Court which could have dealt with the offender in respect of his original offence, is satisfied that the offender has failed to 45 observe any of the conditions of his recognizance, it may issue a warrant for his apprehension. (9) An offender, when apprehended on any such warrant, shall be brought forthwith before the Court issuing the warrant, and such Court may either remand him in custody until the case is heard or admit him to bail with a sufficient surety conditioned on his appearing for sentence and such Court may, after hearing the case, pass sentence. 50 (10) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of the Probation of Offenders 20 of 1958. Act, 1958, or the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 or any other 2 of 2016. law for the time being in force for the treatment, training or rehabilitation of youthful offenders. Special 402. Where in any case the Court could have dealt with,— reasons to be recorded in (a) an accused person under section 401 or under the provisions of the Probation certain cases. of Offenders Act, 1958; or 20 of 1958. (b) a youthful offender under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 or any other law for the time being in force for the treatment, 5 2 of 2016. training or rehabilitation of youthful offenders, but has not done so, it shall record in its judgment the special reasons for not having done so. Court not to 403. Save as otherwise provided by this Sanhita or by any other law for the time being alter in force, no Court, when it has signed its judgment or final order disposing of a case, shall 10 judgment. alter or review the same except to correct a clerical or arithmetical error. Copy of 404. (1) When the accused is sentenced to imprisonment, a copy of the judgment judgment to be shall, immediately after the pronouncement of the judgment, be given to him free of cost. given to the accused and (2) On the application of the accused, a certified copy of the judgment, or when he so other persons. desires, a translation in his own language if practicable or in the language of the Court, shall 15 be given to him without delay, and such copy shall, in every case where the judgment is appealable by the accused, be given free of cost: Provided that where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, a certified copy of the judgment shall be immediately given to the accused free of cost whether or not he applies for the same. 20 (3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply in relation to an order under section 136 as they apply in relation to a judgment which is appealable by the accused. (4) When the accused is sentenced to death by any Court and an appeal lies from such judgment as of right, the Court shall inform him of the period within which, if he wishes to appeal, his appeal should be preferred. 25 (5) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), any person affected by a judgment or order passed by a Court shall, on an application made in this behalf and on payment of the prescribed charges, be given a copy of such judgment or order or of any deposition or other part of the record: Provided that the Court may, if it thinks fit for some special reason, give it to him free 30 of cost: Provided further that the Court may, on an application made in this behalf by the Prosecuting Officer, provide to the Government, free of cost, a certified copy of such judgment, order, deposition or record. (6) The High Court may, by rules, provide for the grant of copies of any judgment or 35 order of a Criminal Court to any person who is not affected by a judgment or order, on payment, by such person, of such fees, and subject to such conditions, as the High Court may, by such rules, provide. Judgment 405. The original judgment shall be filed with the record of the proceedings and when to be where the original is recorded in a language different from that of the Court, and if either 40 translated. party so requires, a translation thereof into the language of the Court shall be added to such record. Court of 406. In cases tried by the Court of Session or a Chief Judicial Magistrate, the Court or Session to such Magistrate, as the case may be, shall forward a copy of its or his finding and sentence send copy of (if any) to the District Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the trial was held. 45 finding and sentence to District Magistrate. CHAPTER XXX SUBMISSION OF DEATH SENTENCES FOR CONFIRMATION 407. (1) When the Court of Session passes a sentence of death, the proceedings shall Sentence of forthwith be submitted to the High Court, and the sentence shall not be executed unless it death to be submitted by 5 is confirmed by the High Court. Court of (2) The Court passing the sentence shall commit the convicted person to jail custody Session for confirmation. under a warrant. 408. (1) If, when such proceedings are submitted, the High Court thinks that a further Power to inquiry should be made into, or additional evidence taken upon, any point bearing upon the direct further inquiry to be 10 guilt or innocence of the convicted person, it may make such inquiry or take such evidence made or itself, or direct it to be made or taken by the Court of Session. additional evidence to be (2) Unless the High Court otherwise directs, the presence of the convicted person taken. may be dispensed with when such inquiry is made or such evidence is taken. (3) When the inquiry or evidence (if any) is not made or taken by the High Court, the 15 result of such inquiry or evidence shall be certified to such Court. 409. In any case submitted under section 407, the High Court— Power of High Court to (a) may confirm the sentence, or pass any other sentence warranted by law, or confirm sentence or (b) may annul the conviction, and convict the accused of any offence of which annul the Court of Session might have convicted him, or order a new trial on the same or an conviction. 20 amended charge, or (c) may acquit the accused person: Provided that no order of confirmation shall be made under this section until the period allowed for preferring an appeal has expired, or, if an appeal is presented within such period, until such appeal is disposed of. 25 410. In every case so submitted, the confirmation of the sentence, or any new sentence Confirmation or order passed by the High Court, shall, when such Court consists of two or more Judges, or new sentence to be be made, passed and signed by at least two of them. signed by two Judges. 411. Where any such case is heard before a Bench of Judges and such Judges are Procedure in equally divided in opinion, the case shall be decided in the manner provided by section 433. case of difference of opinion. 30 412. In cases submitted by the Court of Session to the High Court for the confirmation Procedure in of a sentence of death, the proper officer of the High Court shall, without delay, after the cases submitted to order of confirmation or other order has been made by the High Court, send either physically, High Court for or through electronic means, a copy of the order, under the seal of the High Court and confirmation. attested with his official signature, to the Court of Session. 35 CHAPTER XXXI APPEALS 413. No appeal shall lie from any judgment or order of a Criminal Court except as No appeal to provided for by this Sanhita or by any other law for the time being in force: lie unless otherwise Provided that the victim shall have a right to prefer an appeal against any order provided. 40 passed by the Court acquitting the accused or convicting for a lesser offence or imposing inadequate compensation, and such appeal shall lie to the Court to which an appeal ordinarily lies against the order of conviction of such Court. Appeal from 414. Any person,— orders requiring (i) who has been ordered under section 136 to give security for keeping the security or peace or for good behaviour, or refusal to accept or (ii) who is aggrieved by any order refusing to accept or rejecting a surety under rejecting section 140, 5 surety for keeping peace may appeal against such order to the Court of Session: or good Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to persons the proceedings against behaviour. whom are laid before a Sessions Judge in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) or sub-section (4), of section 141. Appeals from 415. (1) Any person convicted on a trial held by a High Court in its extraordinary 10 convictions. original criminal jurisdiction may appeal to the Supreme Court. (2) Any person convicted on a trial held by a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge or on a trial held by any other Court in which a sentence of imprisonment for more than seven years has been passed against him or against any other person convicted at the same trial, may appeal to the High Court. 15 (3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), any person,— (a) convicted on a trial held by Magistrate of the first class, or of the second class, or (b) sentenced under section 364, or (c) in respect of whom an order has been made or a sentence has been passed 20 under section 401 by any Magistrate, may appeal to the Court of Session. (4) When an appeal has been filed against a sentence passed under section 64, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70 or section 71 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the appeal shall be disposed of within a period of six months from the date of 25 filing of such appeal. No appeal in 416. Notwithstanding anything in section 415, where an accused person has pleaded certain cases guilty and has been convicted on such plea, there shall be no appeal,— when accused pleads guilty. (i) if the conviction is by a High Court; or (ii) if the conviction is by a Court of Session or Magistrate of the first or second 30 class, except as to the extent or legality of the sentence. No appeal in 417. Notwithstanding anything in section 415, there shall be no appeal by a convicted petty cases. person in any of the following cases, namely:— (a) where a High Court passes only a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or of fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, or of both 35 such imprisonment and fine; (b) where a Court of Session passes only a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or of fine not exceeding two hundred rupees, or of both such imprisonment and fine; (c) where a Magistrate of the first class passes only a sentence of fine not 40 exceeding one hundred rupees; or (d) where, in a case tried summarily, a Magistrate empowered to act under section 283 passes only a sentence of fine not exceeding two hundred rupees: Provided that an appeal may be brought against such sentence if any other punishment is combined with it, but such sentence shall not be appealable merely on the ground— 45 (i) that the person convicted is ordered to furnish security to keep the peace; or (ii) that a direction for imprisonment in default of payment of fine is included in the sentence; or (iii) that more than one sentence of fine is passed in the case, if the total amount of 5 fine imposed does not exceed the amount hereinbefore specified in respect of the case. 418. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), the State Government may, in Appeal by the any case of conviction on a trial held by any Court other than a High Court, direct the Public State Government Prosecutor to present an appeal against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy— against (a) to the Court of Session, if the sentence is passed by the Magistrate; and sentence. 10 (b) to the High Court, if the sentence is passed by any other Court. (2) If such conviction is in a case in which the offence has been investigated by any agency empowered to make investigation into an offence under any Central Act other than this Sanhita, the Central Government may also direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy— 15 (a) to the Court of Session, if the sentence is passed by the Magistrate; and (b) to the High Court, if the sentence is passed by any other Court. (3) When an appeal has been filed against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy, the Court of Session or, as the case may be, the High Court shall not enhance the sentence except after giving to the accused a reasonable opportunity of showing cause 20 against such enhancement and while showing cause, the accused may plead for his acquittal or for the reduction of the sentence. (4) When an appeal has been filed against a sentence passed under section 64, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70 or section 71 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the appeal shall be disposed of within a period of six months from the date of 25 filing of such appeal. 419. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), and subject to the provisions Appeal in case of sub-sections (3) and (5),— of acquittal. (a) the District Magistrate may, in any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to the Court of Session from an order of acquittal passed by a 30 Magistrate in respect of a cognizable and non-bailable offence; (b) the State Government may, in any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to the High Court from an original or appellate order of acquittal passed by any Court other than a High Court not being an order under clause (a) or an order of acquittal passed by the Court of Session in revision. 35 (2) If such an order of acquittal is passed in a case in which the offence has been investigated by any agency empowered to make investigation into an offence under any Central Act other than this Sanhita, the Central Government may, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), also direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal— (a) to the Court of Session, from an order of acquittal passed by a Magistrate in 40 respect of a cognizable and non-bailable offence; (b) to the High Court from an original or appellate order of an acquittal passed by any Court other than a High Court not being an order under clause (a) or an order of acquittal passed by the Court of Session in revision. (3) No appeal to the High Court under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be 45 entertained except with the leave of the High Court. (4) If such an order of acquittal is passed in any case instituted upon complaint and the High Court, on an application made to it by the complainant in this behalf, grants special leave to appeal from the order of acquittal, the complainant may present such an appeal to the High Court. (5) No application under sub-section (4) for the grant of special leave to appeal from an order of acquittal shall be entertained by the High Court after the expiry of six months, where the complainant is a public servant, and sixty days in every other case, computed 5 from the date of that order of acquittal. (6) If, in any case, the application under sub-section (4) for the grant of special leave to appeal from an order of acquittal is refused, no appeal from that order of acquittal shall lie under sub-section (1) or under sub-section (2). Appeal against 420. Where the High Court has, on appeal, reversed an order of acquittal of an 10 conviction by accused person and convicted him and sentenced him to death or to imprisonment for life High Court in or to imprisonment for a term of ten years or more, he may appeal to the Supreme Court. certain cases. Special right 421. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, when more persons than of appeal in one are convicted in one trial, and an appealable judgment or order has been passed in certain cases. respect of any of such persons, all or any of the persons convicted at such trial shall have 15 a right of appeal. Appeal to 422. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), an appeal to the Court of Court of Session or Sessions Judge shall be heard by the Sessions Judge or by an Additional Session how Sessions Judge: heard. Provided that an appeal against a conviction on a trial held by a Magistrate of the 20 second class may be heard and disposed of by the Chief Judicial Magistrate. (2) An Additional Sessions Judge or a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall hear only such appeals as the Sessions Judge of the division may, by general or special order, make over to him or as the High Court may, by special order, direct him to hear. Petition of 423. Every appeal shall be made in the form of a petition in writing presented by the 25 appeal. appellant or his advocate, and every such petition shall (unless the Court to which it is presented otherwise directs) be accompanied by a copy of the judgment or order appealed against. Procedure 424. If the appellant is in jail, he may present his petition of appeal and the copies when appellant accompanying the same to the officer in charge of the jail, who shall thereupon forward 30 in jail. such petition and copies to the proper Appellate Court. Summary 425. (1) If upon examining the petition of appeal and copy of the judgment received dismissal of under section 423 or section 424, the Appellate Court considers that there is no sufficient appeal. ground for interfering, it may dismiss the appeal summarily: Provided that— 35 (a) no appeal presented under section 423 shall be dismissed unless the appellant or his advocate has had a reasonable opportunity of being heard in support of the same; (b) no appeal presented under section 424 shall be dismissed except after giving the appellant a reasonable opportunity of being heard in support of the same, unless 40 the Appellate Court considers that the appeal is frivolous or that the production of the accused in custody before the Court would involve such inconvenience as would be disproportionate in the circumstances of the case; (c) no appeal presented under section 424 shall be dismissed summarily until the period allowed for preferring such appeal has expired. 45 (2) Before dismissing an appeal under this section, the Court may call for the record of the case. (3) Where the Appellate Court dismissing an appeal under this section is a Court of Session or of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, it shall record its reasons for doing so. (4) Where an appeal presented under section 424 has been dismissed summarily under this section and the Appellate Court finds that another petition of appeal duly presented 5 under section 423 on behalf of the same appellant has not been considered by it, that Court may, notwithstanding anything contained in section 434, if satisfied that it is necessary in the interests of justice so to do, hear and dispose of such appeal in accordance with law. 426. (1) If the Appellate Court does not dismiss the appeal summarily, it shall cause Procedure for notice of the time and place at which such appeal will be heard to be given— hearing appeals not 10 (i) to the appellant or his advocate; dismissed summarily. (ii) to such officer as the State Government may appoint in this behalf; (iii) if the appeal is from a judgment of conviction in a case instituted upon complaint, to the complainant; (iv) if the appeal is under section 419 or section 420, to the accused, and shall 15 also furnish such officer, complainant and accused with a copy of the grounds of appeal. (2) The Appellate Court shall then send for the record of the case, if such record is not already available in that Court, and hear the parties: Provided that if the appeal is only as to the extent or the legality of the sentence, the 20 Court may dispose of the appeal without sending for the record. (3) Where the only ground for appeal from a conviction is the alleged severity of the sentence, the appellant shall not, except with the leave of the Court, urge or be heard in support of any other ground. 427. After perusing such record and hearing the appellant or his advocate, if he Powers of the 25 appears, and the Public Prosecutor if he appears, and in case of an appeal under section 418 Appellate or section 419, the accused, if he appears, the Appellate Court may, if it considers that there Court. is no sufficient ground for interfering, dismiss the appeal, or may— (a) in an appeal from an order or acquittal, reverse such order and direct that further inquiry be made, or that the accused be re-tried or committed for trial, as the 30 case may be, or find him guilty and pass sentence on him according to law; (b) in an appeal from a conviction— (i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accused, or order him to be re-tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction subordinate to such Appellate Court or committed for trial, or 35 (ii) alter the finding, maintaining the sentence, or (iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent, or the nature and extent, of the sentence, but not so as to enhance the same; (c) in an appeal for enhancement of sentence— (i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accused 40 or order him to be re-tried by a Court competent to try the offence, or (ii) alter the finding maintaining the sentence, or (iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent, or, the nature and extent, of the sentence, so as to enhance or reduce the same; (d) in an appeal from any other order, alter or reverse such order; 45 (e) make any amendment or any consequential or incidental order that may be just or proper: Provided that the sentence shall not be enhanced unless the accused has had an opportunity of showing cause against such enhancement: Provided further that the Appellate Court shall not inflict greater punishment for the offence which in its opinion the accused has committed, than might have been inflicted for that offence by the Court passing the order or sentence under appeal. 5 Judgments of 428. The rules contained in Chapter XXVIII as to the judgment of a Criminal Court of Subordinate original jurisdiction shall apply, so far as may be practicable, to the judgment in appeal of a Appellate Court of Session or Chief Judicial Magistrate: Court. Provided that, unless the Appellate Court otherwise directs, the accused shall not be brought up, or required to attend, to hear judgment delivered. 10 Order of High 429. (1) Whenever a case is decided on appeal by the High Court under this Chapter, Court on it shall certify its judgment or order to the Court by which the finding, sentence or order appeal to be appealed against was recorded or passed and if such Court is that of a Judicial Magistrate certified to other than the Chief Judicial Magistrate, the High Court's judgment or order shall be sent lower Court. through the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and if such Court is that of an Executive Magistrate, 15 the High Court's judgment or order shall be sent through the District Magistrate. (2) The Court to which the High Court certifies its judgment or order shall thereupon make such orders as are conformable to the judgment or order of the High Court; and if necessary, the record shall be amended in accordance therewith. Suspension of 430. (1) Pending any appeal by a convicted person, the Appellate Court may, for 20 sentence reasons to be recorded by it in writing, order that the execution of the sentence or order pending the appealed against be suspended and, also, if he is in confinement, that he be released on bail, appeal; release or on his own bond: of appellant on bail. Provided that the Appellate Court shall, before releasing on bail or on his own bond a convicted person who is convicted of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment 25 for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years, shall give opportunity to the Public Prosecutor for showing cause in writing against such release: Provided further that in cases where a convicted person is released on bail it shall be open to the Public Prosecutor to file an application for the cancellation of the bail. (2) The power conferred by this section on an Appellate Court may be exercised also 30 by the High Court in the case of an appeal by a convicted person to a Court subordinate thereto. (3) Where the convicted person satisfies the Court by which he is convicted that he intends to present an appeal, the Court shall,— (i) where such person, being on bail, is sentenced to imprisonment for a term 35 not exceeding three years, or (ii) where the offence of which such person has been convicted is a bailable one, and he is on bail, order that the convicted person be released on bail, unless there are special reasons for refusing bail, for such period as will afford sufficient time to present the appeal and obtain 40 the orders of the Appellate Court under sub-section (1); and the sentence of imprisonment shall, so long as he is so released on bail, be deemed to be suspended. (4) When the appellant is ultimately sentenced to imprisonment for a term or to imprisonment for life, the time during which he is so released shall be excluded in computing the term for which he is so sentenced. 45 Arrest of 431. When an appeal is presented under section 419, the High Court may issue a accused in warrant directing that the accused be arrested and brought before it or any Subordinate appeal from Court, and the Court before which he is brought may commit him to prison pending the acquittal. disposal of the appeal or admit him to bail. 432. (1) In dealing with any appeal under this Chapter, the Appellate Court, if it thinks Appellate additional evidence to be necessary, shall record its reasons and may either take such Court may take further evidence itself, or direct it to be taken by a Magistrate or, when the Appellate Court is a High evidence or Court, by a Court of Session or a Magistrate. direct it to be taken. 5 (2) When the additional evidence is taken by the Court of Session or the Magistrate, it or he shall certify such evidence to the Appellate Court, and such Court shall thereupon proceed to dispose of the appeal. (3) The accused or his advocate shall have the right to be present when the additional evidence is taken. 10 (4) The taking of evidence under this section shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter XXIV, as if it were an inquiry. 433. When an appeal under this Chapter is heard by a High Court before a Bench of Procedure Judges and they are divided in opinion, the appeal, with their opinions, shall be laid before where Judges another Judge of that Court, and that Judge, after such hearing as he thinks fit, shall deliver of Court of Appeal are 15 his opinion, and the judgment or order shall follow that opinion: equally Provided that if one of the Judges constituting the Bench, or, where the appeal is laid divided. before another Judge under this section, that Judge, so requires, the appeal shall be re-heard and decided by a larger Bench of Judges. 434. Judgments and orders passed by an Appellate Court upon an appeal shall be Finality of 20 final, except in the cases provided for in section 418, section 419, sub-section (4) of section judgments and orders on 425 or Chapter XXXII: appeal. Provided that notwithstanding the final disposal of an appeal against conviction in any case, the Appellate Court may hear and dispose of, on the merits,— (a) an appeal against acquittal under section 419, arising out of the same case, 25 or (b) an appeal for the enhancement of sentence under section 418, arising out of the same case. 435. (1) Every other appeal under section 418 or section 419 shall finally abate on the Abatement of death of the accused. appeals. 30 (2) Every other appeal under this Chapter (except an appeal from a sentence of fine) shall finally abate on the death of the appellant: Provided that where the appeal is against a conviction and sentence of death or of imprisonment, and the appellant dies during the pendency of the appeal, any of his near relatives may, within thirty days of the death of the appellant, apply to the Appellate Court 35 for leave to continue the appeal; and if leave is granted, the appeal shall not abate. Explanation.—In this section, "near relative" means a parent, spouse, lineal descendant, brother or sister. CHAPTER XXXII REFERENCE AND REVISION 40 436. (1) Where any Court is satisfied that a case pending before it involves a question Reference to as to the validity of any Act, Ordinance or Regulation or of any provision contained in an High Court. Act, Ordinance or Regulation, the determination of which is necessary for the disposal of the case, and is of opinion that such Act, Ordinance, Regulation or provision is invalid or inoperative, but has not been so declared by the High Court to which that Court is 45 Subordinate or by the Supreme Court, the Court shall state a case setting out its opinion and the reasons therefor, and refer the same for the decision of the High Court. Explanation.—In this section, "Regulation" means any Regulation as defined in the General Clauses Act, 1897, or in the General Clauses Act of a State. 10 of 1897. (2) A Court of Session may, if it or he thinks fit in any case pending before it or him to which the provisions of sub-section (1) do not apply, refer for the decision of the High Court any question of law arising in the hearing of such case. 5 (3) Any Court making a reference to the High Court under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) may, pending the decision of the High Court thereon, either commit the accused to jail or release him on bail to appear when called upon. Disposal of 437. (1) When a question has been so referred, the High Court shall pass such order case according thereon as it thinks fit, and shall cause a copy of such order to be sent to the Court by which 10 to decision of the reference was made, which shall dispose of the case conformably to the said order. High Court. (2) The High Court may direct by whom the costs of such reference shall be paid. Calling for 438. (1) The High Court or any Sessions Judge may call for and examine the record of records to any proceeding before any inferior Criminal Court situate within its or his local jurisdiction exercise for the purpose of satisfying itself or himself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of 15 powers of revision. any finding, sentence or order, recorded or passed, and as to the regularity of any proceedings of such inferior Court, and may, when calling, for such record, direct that the execution of any sentence or order be suspended, and if the accused is in confinement that he be released on bail or on his own bond pending the examination of the record. Explanation.—All Magistrates, whether Executive or Judicial, and whether exercising 20 original or appellate jurisdiction, shall be deemed to be inferior to the Sessions Judge for the purposes of this sub-section and of section 439. (2) The powers of revision conferred by sub-section (1) shall not be exercised in relation to any interlocutory order passed in any appeal, inquiry, trial or other proceeding. (3) If an application under this section has been made by any person either to the 25 High Court or to the Sessions Judge, no further application by the same person shall be entertained by the other of them. Power to 439. On examining any record under section 438 or otherwise, the High Court or the order inquiry. Sessions Judge may direct the Chief Judicial Magistrate by himself or by any of the Magistrates subordinate to him to make, and the Chief Judicial Magistrate may himself 30 make or direct any subordinate Magistrate to make, further inquiry into any complaint which has been dismissed under section 226 or sub-section (4) of section 227, or into the case of any person accused of an offence who has been discharged: Provided that no Court shall make any direction under this section for inquiry into the case of any person who has been discharged unless such person has had an opportunity of 35 showing cause why such direction should not be made. Sessions 440. (1) In the case of any proceeding the record of which has been called for by Judge's powers himself, the Sessions Judge may exercise all or any of the powers which may be exercised by of revision. the High Court under sub-section (1) of section 442. (2) Where any proceeding by way of revision is commenced before a Sessions Judge 40 under sub-section (1), the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 442 shall, so far as may be, apply to such proceeding and references in the said sub-sections to the High Court shall be construed as references to the Sessions Judge. (3) Where any application for revision is made by or on behalf of any person before the Sessions Judge, the decision of the Sessions Judge thereon in relation to such person 45 shall be final and no further proceeding by way of revision at the instance of such person shall be entertained by the High Court or any other Court. Power of 441. An Additional Sessions Judge shall have and may exercise all the powers of a Additional Sessions Judge under this Chapter in respect of any case which may be transferred to him Sessions Judge. by or under any general or special order of the Sessions Judge. 50 442. (1) In the case of any proceeding the record of which has been called for by itself High Court's or which otherwise comes to its knowledge, the High Court may, in its discretion, exercise powers of revision. any of the powers conferred on a Court of Appeal by sections 427, 430, 431 and 432 or on a Court of Session by section 344, and, when the Judges composing the Court of Revision are 5 equally divided in opinion, the case shall be disposed of in the manner provided by section 433. (2) No order under this section shall be made to the prejudice of the accused or other person unless he has had an opportunity of being heard either personally or by advocate in his own defence. 10 (3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a High Court to convert a finding of acquittal into one conviction. (4) Where under this Sanhita an appeal lies and no appeal is brought, no proceeding by way of revision shall be entertained at the instance of the party who could have appealed. (5) Where under this Sanhita an appeal lies but an application for revision has been 15 made to the High Court by any person and the High Court is satisfied that such application was made under the erroneous belief that no appeal lies thereto and that it is necessary in the interests of justice so to do, the High Court may treat the application for revision as a petition of appeal and deal with the same accordingly. 443. (1) Whenever one or more persons convicted at the same trial makes or make Power of High 20 application to a High Court for revision and any other person convicted at the same trial Court to makes an application to the Sessions Judge for revision, the High Court shall decide, withdraw or transfer having regard to the general convenience of the parties and the importance of the questions revision cases. involved, which of the two Courts should finally dispose of the applications for revision and when the High Court decides that all the applications for revision should be disposed 25 of by itself, the High Court shall direct that the applications for revision pending before the Sessions Judge be transferred to itself and where the High Court decides that it is not necessary for it to dispose of the applications for revision, it shall direct that the applications for revision made to it be transferred to the Sessions Judge. (2) Whenever any application for revision is transferred to the High Court, that Court 30 shall deal with the same as if it were an application duly made before itself. (3) Whenever any application for revision is transferred to the Sessions Judge, that Judge shall deal with the same as if it were an application duly made before himself. (4) Where an application for revision is transferred by the High Court to the Sessions Judge, no further application for revision shall lie to the High Court or to any other Court at 35 the instance of the person or persons whose applications for revision have been disposed of by the Sessions Judge. 444. Save as otherwise expressly provided by this Sanhita, no party has any right to Option of be heard either personally or by an advocate before any Court exercising its powers of Court to hear parties. revision; but the Court may, if it thinks fit, when exercising such powers, hear any party 40 either personally or by advocate. 445. When the record of any trial held by a Magistrate is called for by the High Court Statement by or Court of Session under section 438, the Magistrate may submit with the record a statement Magistrate of setting forth the grounds of his decision or order and any facts which he thinks material to grounds of his decision to be the issue, and that Court shall consider such statement before overruling or setting aside considered by 45 the said decision or order. High Court. 446. When a case is revised under this Chapter by the High Court or a Sessions High Court's Judge, it or he shall, in the manner provided by section 429, certify its decision or order to order to be the Court by which the finding, sentence or order revised was recorded or passed, and the certified to lower Court. Court to which the decision or order is so certified shall thereupon make such orders as are 50 conformable to the decision so certified, and, if necessary, the record shall be amended in accordance therewith. CHAPTER XXXIII TRANSFER OF CRIMINAL CASES Power of 447. (1) Whenever it is made to appear to the Supreme Court that an order under this Supreme Court section is expedient for the ends of justice, it may direct that any particular case or appeal be to transfer transferred from one High Court to another High Court or from a Criminal Court subordinate 5 cases and to one High Court to another Criminal Court of equal or superior jurisdiction subordinate to appeals. another High Court. (2) The Supreme Court may act under this section only on the application of the Attorney-General of India or of a party interested, and every such application shall be made by motion, which shall, except when the applicant is the Attorney-General of India or the 10 Advocate-General of the State, be supported by affidavit or affirmation. (3) Where any application for the exercise of the powers conferred by this section is dismissed, the Supreme Court may, if it is of opinion that the application was frivolous or vexatious, order the applicant to pay by way of compensation to any person who has opposed the application such sum as it may consider appropriate in the circumstances of 15 the case. Power of High 448. (1) Whenever it is made to appear to the High Court— Court to transfer cases (a) that a fair and impartial inquiry or trial cannot be had in any Criminal Court and appeals. subordinate thereto, or (b) that some question of law of unusual difficulty is likely to arise, or 20 (c) that an order under this section is required by any provision of this Sanhita, or will tend to the general convenience of the parties or witnesses, or is expedient for the ends of justice, it may order— (i) that any offence be inquired into or tried by any Court not qualified under 25 sections 197 to 205 (both inclusive), but in other respects competent to inquire into or try such offence; (ii) that any particular case or appeal, or class of cases or appeals, be transferred from a Criminal Court subordinate to its authority to any other such Criminal Court of equal or superior jurisdiction; 30 (iii) that any particular case be committed for trial to a Court of Session; or (iv) that any particular case or appeal be transferred to and tried before itself. (2) The High Court may act either on the report of the lower Court, or on the application of a party interested, or on its own initiative: Provided that no application shall lie to the High Court for transferring a case from 35 one Criminal Court to another Criminal Court in the same sessions division, unless an application for such transfer has been made to the Sessions Judge and rejected by him. (3) Every application for an order under sub-section (1) shall be made by motion, which shall, except when the applicant is the Advocate-General of the State, be supported by affidavit or affirmation. 40 (4) When such application is made by an accused person, the High Court may direct him to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for the payment of any compensation which the High Court may award under sub-section (7). (5) Every accused person making such application shall give to the Public Prosecutor notice in writing of the application, together with a copy of the grounds on which it is made; 45 and no order shall be made on the merits of the applications unless at least twenty-four hours have elapsed between the giving of such notice and the hearing of the application. (6) Where the application is for the transfer of a case or appeal from any Subordinate Court, the High Court may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do in the interest of justice, order that, pending the disposal of the application the proceedings in the Subordinate Court shall be stayed, on such terms as the High Court may think fit to impose: 5 Provided that such stay shall not affect the Subordinate Court's power of remand under section 346. (7) Where an application for an order under sub-section (1) is dismissed, the High Court may, if it is of opinion that the application was frivolous or vexatious, order the applicant to pay by way of compensation to any person who has opposed the application 10 such sum as it may consider proper in the circumstances of the case. (8) When the High Court orders under sub-section (1) that a case be transferred from any Court for trial before itself, it shall observe in such trial the same procedure which that Court would have observed if the case had not been so transferred. (9) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect any order of Government under 15 section 218. 449. (1) Whenever it is made to appear to a Sessions Judge that an order under this Power of sub-section is expedient for the ends of justice, he may order that any particular case be Sessions Judge transferred from one Criminal Court to another Criminal Court in his sessions division. to transfer cases and (2) The Sessions Judge may act either on the report of the lower Court, or on the appeals. 20 application of a party interested, or on his own initiative. (3) The provisions of sub-sections (3), (4), (5), (6), (7) and (9) of section 448 shall apply in relation to an application to the Sessions Judge for an order under sub-section (1) as they apply in relation to an application to the High Court for an order under sub-section (1) of section 448, except that sub-section (7) of that section shall so apply as 25 if for the word "sum" occurring therein, the words "sum not exceeding ten thousand rupees" were substituted. 450. (1) A Sessions Judge may withdraw any case or appeal from, or recall any case or Withdrawal of appeal which he has made over to a Chief Judicial Magistrate subordinate to him. cases and appeals by (2) At any time before the trial of the case or the hearing of the appeal has commenced Session Judge. 30 before the Additional Sessions Judge, a Sessions Judge may recall any case or appeal which he has made over to any Additional Sessions Judge. (3) Where a Sessions Judge withdraws or recalls case or appeal under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), he may either try the case in his own Court or hear the appeal himself, or make it over in accordance with the provisions of this Sanhita to another Court for trial or 35 hearing, as the case may be. 451. (1) Any Chief Judicial Magistrate may withdraw any case from, or recall any case Withdrawal of which he has made over to, any Magistrate subordinate to him, and may inquire into or try cases by such case himself, or refer it for inquiry or trial to any other such Magistrate competent to Judicial Magistrate. inquire into or try the same. 40 (2) Any Judicial Magistrate may recall any case made over by him under sub-section (2) of section 213 to any other Magistrate and may inquire into or try such cases himself. 452. Any District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate may— Making over or withdrawal (a) make over, for disposal, any proceeding which has been started before him, of cases by 45 to any Magistrate subordinate to him; Executive Magistrates. (b) withdraw any case from, or recall any case which he has made over to, any Magistrate subordinate to him, and dispose of such proceeding himself or refer it for disposal to any other Magistrate. Reasons to be 453. A Sessions Judge or Magistrate making an order under section 450, section 451, recorded. section 452 or section 453 shall record his reasons for making it. CHAPTER XXXIV EXECUTION, SUSPENSION, REMISSION AND COMMUTATION OF SENTENCES A.—Death Sentences 5 Execution of 454. When in a case submitted to the High Court for the confirmation of a sentence of order passed death, the Court of Session receives the order of confirmation or other order of the High under section Court thereon, it shall cause such order to be carried into effect by issuing a warrant or 410. taking such other steps as may be necessary. Execution of 455. When a sentence of death is passed by the High Court in appeal or in revision, 10 sentence of the Court of Session shall, on receiving the order of the High Court, cause the sentence to death passed be carried into effect by issuing a warrant. by High Court. Postponement 456. (1) Where a person is sentenced to death by the High Court and an appeal from of execution its judgment lies to the Supreme Court under sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) of clause (1) of sentence of of article 134 of the Constitution, the High Court shall order the execution of the sentence to 15 death in case be postponed until the period allowed for preferring such appeal has expired, or if, an appeal of appeal to is preferred within that period, until such appeal is disposed of. Supreme Court. (2) Where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, and the person sentenced makes an application to the High Court for the grant of a certificate under article 132 or under sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of article 134 of the Constitution, the High 20 Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be postponed until such application is disposed of by the High Court, or if a certificate is granted on such application, until the period allowed for preferring an appeal to the Supreme Court on such certificate has expired. (3) Where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, and the High Court is satisfied that the person sentenced intends to present a petition to the Supreme 25 Court for the grant of special leave to appeal under article 136 of the Constitution, the High Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be postponed for such period as it considers sufficient to enable him to present such petition. Postponement 457. If a woman sentenced to death is found to be pregnant, the High Court shall of capital commute the sentence to imprisonment for life. 30 sentence on pregnant woman. B.—Imprisonment Power to 458. (1) Except when otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force, the appoint place State Government may direct in what place any person liable to be imprisoned or committed of to custody under this Sanhita shall be confined. imprisonment. (2) If any person liable to be imprisoned or committed to custody under this Sanhita 35 is in confinement in a civil jail, the Court or Magistrate ordering the imprisonment or committal may direct that the person be removed to a criminal jail. (3) When a person is removed to a criminal jail under sub-section (2), he shall, on being released therefrom, be sent back to the civil jail, unless either— (a) three years have elapsed since he was removed to the criminal jail, in which 40 case he shall be deemed to have been released from the civil jail under section 58 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; or 5 of 1908. (b) the Court which ordered his imprisonment in the civil jail has certified to the officer in charge of the criminal jail that he is entitled to be released under section 58 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 5 of 1908. 459. (1) Where the accused is sentenced to imprisonment for life or to imprisonment Execution of for a term in cases other than those provided for by section 455, the Court passing the sentence of imprisonment. sentence shall forthwith forward a warrant to the jail or other place in which he is, or is to be, confined, and, unless the accused is already confined in such jail or other place, shall 5 forward him to such jail or other place, with the warrant: Provided that where the accused is sentenced to imprisonment till the rising of the Court, it shall not be necessary to prepare or forward a warrant to a jail, and the accused may be confined in such place as the Court may direct. (2) Where the accused is not present in Court when he is sentenced to such 10 imprisonment as is mentioned in sub-section (1), the Court shall issue a warrant for his arrest for the purpose of forwarding him to the jail or other place in which he is to be confined; and in such case, the sentence shall commence on the date of his arrest. 460. Every warrant for the execution of a sentence of imprisonment shall be directed Direction of to the officer in charge of the jail or other place in which the prisoner is, or is to be, confined. warrant for execution. 15 461. When the prisoner is to be confined in a jail, the warrant shall be lodged with the Warrant with jailor. whom to be lodged. C.-Levy of fine 462. (1) When an offender has been sentenced to pay a fine, but no such payment Warrant for has been made, the Court passing the sentence may take action for the recovery of the fine levy of fine. 20 in either or both of the following ways, that is to say, it may— (a) issue a warrant for the levy of the amount by attachment and sale of any movable property belonging to the offender; (b) issue a warrant to the Collector of the district, authorising him to realise the amount as arrears of land revenue from the movable or immovable property, or both, 25 of the defaulter: Provided that, if the sentence directs that in default of payment of the fine, the offender shall be imprisoned, and if such offender has undergone the whole of such imprisonment in default, no Court shall issue such warrant unless, for special reasons to be recorded in writing, it considers it necessary so to do, or unless it has made an order for the 30 payment of expenses or compensation out of the fine under section 395. (2) The State Government may make rules regulating the manner in which warrants under clause (a) of sub-section (1) are to be executed, and for the summary determination of any claims made by any person other than the offender in respect of any property attached in execution of such warrant. 35 (3) Where the Court issues a warrant to the Collector under clause (b) of sub-section (1), the Collector shall realise the amount in accordance with the law relating to recovery of arrears of land revenue, as if such warrant were a certificate issued under such law: Provided that no such warrant shall be executed by the arrest or detention in prison of the offender. 40 463. A warrant issued under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 462 by any Court Effect of such may be executed within the local jurisdiction of such Court, and it shall authorise the warrant. attachment and sale of any such property outside such jurisdiction, when it is endorsed by the District Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction such property is found. 464. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Sanhita or in any other law for the Warrant for 45 time being in force, when an offender has been sentenced to pay a fine by a Criminal Court levy of fine issued by a in any territory to which this Sanhita does not extend and the Court passing the sentence Court in any issues a warrant to the Collector of a district in the territories to which this Sanhita extends, territory to authorising him to realise the amount as if it were an arrear of land revenue, such warrant which this shall be deemed to be a warrant issued under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 462 by Sanhita does not extend. a Court in the territories to which this Sanhita extends, and the provisions of sub-section (3) of the said section as to the execution of such warrant shall apply accordingly. Suspension of 465. (1) When an offender has been sentenced to fine only and to imprisonment in execution of default of payment of the fine, and the fine is not paid forthwith, the Court may— sentence of imprisonment. (a) order that the fine shall be payable either in full on or before a date not more 5 than thirty days from the date of the order, or in two or three installments, of which the first shall be payable on or before a date not more than thirty days from the date of the order and the other or others at an interval or at intervals, as the case may be, of not more than thirty days; (b) suspend the execution of the sentence of imprisonment and release the 10 offender, on the execution by the offender of a bond, with or without sureties, as the Court thinks fit, conditioned for his appearance before the Court on the date or dates on or before which payment of the fine or the installments thereof, as the case may be, is to be made; and if the amount of the fine or of any installment, as the case may be, is not realised on or before the latest date on which it is payable under the order, the 15 Court may direct the sentence of imprisonment to be carried into execution at once. (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall be applicable also in any case in which an order for the payment of money has been made on non-recovery of which imprisonment may be awarded and the money is not paid forthwith; and, if the person against whom the order has been made, on being required to enter into a bond such as is referred to in that 20 sub-section, fails to do so, the Court may at once pass sentence of imprisonment. D.—General provisions regarding execution 466. Every warrant for the execution of a sentence may be issued either by the Judge Who may issue warrant. or Magistrate who passed the sentence, or by his successor-in-office. Sentence on 467. (1) When a sentence of death, imprisonment for life or fine is passed under this 25 escaped Sanhita on an escaped convict, such sentence shall, subject to the provisions hereinbefore convict when contained, take effect immediately. to take effect. (2) When a sentence of imprisonment for a term is passed under this Sanhita on an escaped convict,— (a) if such sentence is severer in kind than the sentence which such convict 30 was undergoing when he escaped, the new sentence shall take effect immediately; (b) if such sentence is not severer in kind than the sentence which such convict was undergoing when he escaped, the new sentence shall take effect after he has suffered imprisonment for a further period equal to that which, at the time of his escape, remained unexpired of his former sentence. 35 (3) For the purposes of sub-section (2), a sentence of rigorous imprisonment shall be deemed to be severer in kind than a sentence of simple imprisonment. Sentence on 468. (1) When a person already undergoing a sentence of imprisonment is sentenced offender on a subsequent conviction to imprisonment or imprisonment for life, such imprisonment or already imprisonment for life shall commence at the expiration of the imprisonment to which he has 40 sentenced for been previously sentenced, unless the Court directs that the subsequent sentence shall another offence. run concurrently with such previous sentence: Provided that where a person who has been sentenced to imprisonment by an order under section 141 in default of furnishing security is, whilst undergoing such sentence, sentenced to imprisonment for an offence committed prior to the making of such order, the 45 latter sentence shall commence immediately. (2) When a person already undergoing a sentence of imprisonment for life is sentenced on a subsequent conviction to imprisonment for a term or imprisonment for life, the subsequent sentence shall run concurrently with such previous sentence. 469. Where an accused person has, on conviction, been sentenced to imprisonment Period of for a term, not being imprisonment in default of payment of fine, the period of detention, if detention undergone by any, undergone by him during the investigation, inquiry or trial of the same case and before accused to be the date of such conviction, shall be set off against the term of imprisonment imposed on set off against 5 him on such conviction, and the liability of such person to undergo imprisonment on such sentence conviction shall be restricted to the remainder, if any, of the term of imprisonment imposed of on him: imprisonment. Provided that in cases referred to in section 476, such period of detention shall be set off against the period of fourteen years referred to in that section. 10 470. (1) Nothing in section 467 or section 468 shall be held to excuse any person from Saving. any part of the punishment to which he is liable upon his former or subsequent conviction. (2) When an award of imprisonment in default of payment of a fine is annexed to a substantive sentence of imprisonment and the person undergoing the sentence is after its execution to undergo a further substantive sentence or further substantive sentences of 15 imprisonment, effect shall not be given to the award of imprisonment in default of payment of the fine until the person has undergone the further sentence or sentences. 471. When a sentence has been fully executed, the officer executing it shall return the Return of warrant to the Court from which it is issued, with an endorsement under his hand certifying warrant on execution of the manner in which the sentence has been executed. sentence. 20 472. Any money (other than a fine) payable by virtue of any order made under this Money Sanhita, and the method of recovery of which is not otherwise expressly provided for, shall ordered to be be recoverable as if it were a fine: paid recoverable as Provided that section 462 shall, in its application to an order under section 400, by a fine. virtue of this section, be construed as if in the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 462, 25 after the words and figures "under section 395", the words and figures "or an order for payment of costs under section 401" had been inserted. 473. (1) A convict under the sentence of death or his legal heir or any other relative Mercy may, if he has not already submitted a petition for mercy, file a mercy petition before the Petition in death sentence President of India under article 72 or the Governor of the State under article 161 of the cases. 30 Constitution within a period of thirty days after the date on which the Superintendent of the Jail,— (i) informs him about the dismissal of the appeal or special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court; or (ii) informs him about the date of confirmation of the sentence of death by the 35 High Court and the time allowed to file an appeal or special leave in the Supreme Court has expired, and that may present the mercy petition to the Home Department of the State Government or the Central Government, as the case may be. (2) The petition under sub-section (1) may, initially be made to the Governor and on 40 its rejection or disposal by the Governor, the petition shall be made to the President within a period of sixty days from the date of rejection or disposal of his petition. (3) The Superintendent of the Jail or officer in charge of the Jail shall ensure, that every convict, in case there are more than one convict in a case, also makes the mercy petition within a period of sixty days and on non-receipt of such petition from the other 45 convicts, Superintendent of the Jail shall send the names, addresses, copy of the record of the case and all other details of the case to the Central Government or State Government for consideration along with the said mercy petition. (4) The Central Government shall, on receipt of the mercy petition seek the comments of the State Government and consider the petition along with the records of the case and make recommendations to the President in this behalf, as expeditiously as possible, within a period of sixty days from the date of receipt of comments of the State Government and records from Superintendent of the Jail. (5) The President may, consider, decide and dispose of the mercy petition and, in case there are more than one convict in a case, the petitions shall be decided by the President 5 together in the interests of justice. (6) Upon receipt of the order of the President on the mercy petition, the Central Government shall within forty-eight hours, communicate the same to the Home Department of the State Governnment and the Superintendent of the Jail or officer in charge of the Jail. (7) No appeal shall lie in any Court against the order of the President made under 10 article 72 of the Constitution and it shall be final, and any question as to the arriving of the decision by the President shall not be enquired into in any Court. Power to 474. (1) When any person has been sentenced to punishment for an offence, the suspend or appropriate Government may, at any time, without conditions or upon any conditions which remit the person sentenced accepts, suspend the execution of his sentence or remit the whole or 15 sentences. any part of the punishment to which he has been sentenced. (2) Whenever an application is made to the appropriate Government for the suspension or remission of a sentence, the appropriate Government may require the presiding Judge of the Court before or by which the conviction was had or confirmed, to state his opinion as to whether the application should be granted or refused, together with his reasons for such 20 opinion and also to forward with the statement of such opinion a certified copy of the record of the trial or of such record thereof as exists. (3) If any condition on which a sentence has been suspended or remitted is, in the opinion of the appropriate Government, not fulfilled, the appropriate Government may cancel the suspension or remission, and thereupon the person in whose favour the sentence has 25 been suspended or remitted may, if at large, be arrested by any police officer, without warrant and remanded to undergo the unexpired portion of the sentence. (4) The condition on which a sentence is suspended or remitted under this section may be one to be fulfilled by the person in whose favour the sentence is suspended or remitted, or one independent of his will. 30 (5) The appropriate Government may, by general rules or special orders, give directions as to the suspension of sentences and the conditions on which petitions should be presented and dealt with: Provided that in the case of any sentence (other than a sentence of fine) passed on a person above the age of eighteen years, no such petition by the person sentenced or by 35 any other person on his behalf shall be entertained, unless the person sentenced is in jail, and— (a) where such petition is made by the person sentenced, it is presented through the officer in charge of the jail; or (b) where such petition is made by any other person, it contains a declaration 40 that the person sentenced is in jail. (6) The provisions of the above sub-sections shall also apply to any order passed by a Criminal Court under any section of this Sanhita or of any other law, which restricts the liberty of any person or imposes any liability upon him or his property. (7) In this section and in section 475, the expression "appropriate Government" 45 means,— (a) in cases where the sentence is for an offence against, or the order referred to in sub-section (6) is passed under, any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, the Central Government; (b) in other cases, the Government of the State within which the offender is sentenced or the said order is passed. 475. The appropriate Government may, without the consent of the person sentenced, Power to commute— commute sentence. 5 (a) a sentence of death, for imprisonment for life; (b) a sentence of imprisonment for life, for imprisonment for a term not less than seven years; (c) a sentence of imprisonment for seven years or ten years, for imprisonment for a term not less than three years; 10 (d) a sentence of rigorous imprisonment, for simple imprisonment for any term to which that person might have been sentenced; (e) a sentence of imprisonment up to three years, for fine. 476. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 474, where a sentence of Restriction on imprisonment for life is imposed on conviction of a person for an offence for which death is powers of remission or 15 one of the punishments provided by law, or where a sentence of death imposed on a person commutation has been commuted under section 475 into one of imprisonment for life, such person shall in certain not be released from prison unless he had served at least fourteen years of imprisonment. cases. 477. The powers conferred by sections 474 and 475 upon the State Government may, Concurrent in the case of sentences of death, also be exercised by the Central Government. power of Central Government in case of death sentences. 20 478. (1) The powers conferred by sections 474 and 475 upon the State Government to State remit or commute a sentence, in any case where the sentence is for an offence— Government to act after (a) which was investigated by any agency empowered to make investigation concurrence into an offence under any Central Act other than this Sanhita; or with Central Government (b) which involved the misappropriation or destruction of, or damage to, any in certain 25 property belonging to the Central Government; or cases. (c) which was committed by a person in the service of the Central Government while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, shall not be exercised by the State Government except after concurrence with the Central Government. 30 (2) No order of suspension, remission or commutation of sentences passed by the State Government in relation to a person, who has been convicted of offences, some of which relate to matters to which the executive power of the Union extends, and who has been sentenced to separate terms of imprisonment which are to run concurrently, shall have effect unless an order for the suspension, remission or commutation, as the case may be, of such sentences has also 35 been made by the Central Government in relation to the offences committed by such person with regard to matters to which the executive power of the Union extends. CHAPTER XXXV PROVISIONS AS TO BAIL AND BONDS 479. In this Sanhita, unless the context otherwise requires,— Bail and bond. 40 (a) "bail" means release of a person accused of an offence from the custody of law upon certain conditions imposed by an officer or court including execution by such person of a bond or a bail bond. (b) "bond" means a personal bond or an undertaking for release without payment of any surety; (c) "bail bond" means an undertaking for release with payment of surety. In what cases 480. (1) When any person other than a person accused of a non-bailable offence is bail to be arrested without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station, or appears or is brought 5 taken. before a Court, and is prepared at any time while in the custody of such officer or at any stage of the proceeding before such Court to give bail, such person shall be released on bail: Provided that such officer or Court, if he or it thinks fit, may, and shall, if such person is indigent and is unable to furnish surety, instead of taking bail bond from such person, 10 discharge him on his executing a bond for his appearance as hereinafter provided. Explanation.—Where a person is unable to give bail bond within a week of the date of his arrest, it shall be a sufficient ground for the officer or the Court to presume that he is an indigent person for the purposes of this proviso: Provided further that nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the provisions 15 of sub-section (3) of section 135 or section 494. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a person has failed to comply with the conditions of the bail bond as regards the time and place of attendance, the Court may refuse to release him on bail, when on a subsequent occasion in the same case he appears before the Court or is brought in custody and any such refusal shall be 20 without prejudice to the powers of the Court to call upon any person bound by such bond to pay the penalty thereof under section 493. Maximum 481. (1) Where a person has, during the period of investigation, inquiry or trial under period for this Sanhita of an offence under any law (not being an offence for which the punishment of which death or life imprisonment has been specified as one of the punishments under that law) 25 undertrial undergone detention for a period extending up to one-half of the maximum period of prisoner can imprisonment specified for that offence under that law, he shall be released by the Court on be detained. bail: Provided that where such person is a first-time offender (who has never been convicted of any offence in the past) he shall be released on bail by the Court, if he has undergone 30 detention for the period extending up to one-third of the maximum period of imprisonment specified for such offence under that law: Provided further that the Court may, after hearing the Public Prosecutor and for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, order the continued detention of such person for a period longer than one-half of the said period or release him on bail bond instead of the 35 personal bond: Provided further that no such person shall in any case be detained during the period of investigation, inquiry or trial for more than the maximum period of imprisonment provided for the said offence under that law. Explanation.—In computing the period of detention under this section for granting 40 bail, the period of detention passed due to delay in proceeding caused by the accused shall be excluded. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an investigation, inquiry or trial in more than one offence or in multiple cases are pending against a person, he shall not be released on bail by the Court. 45 (3) The Superintendent of jail, where the accused person is detained, on completion of one-half or one-third of the period mentioned in sub-section (1), as the case may be, shall forthwith make an application in writing to the Court to proceed under sub-section (1) for the release of such person on bail. 482. (1) When any person accused of, or suspected of, the commission of any When bail non-bailable offence is arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a may be taken in case of police station or appears or is brought before a Court other than the High Court or Court of non-bailable session, he may be released on bail, but— offence. 5 (i) such person shall not be so released if there appear reasonable grounds for believing that he has been guilty of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life; (ii) such person shall not be so released if such offence is a cognizable offence and he had been previously convicted of an offence punishable with death, 10 imprisonment for life or imprisonment for seven years or more, or he had been previously convicted on two or more occasions of a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment for three years or more but less than seven years: Provided that the Court may direct that a person referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) be released on bail if such person is under the age of eighteen years or is a woman or is sick 15 or infirm: Provided further that the Court may also direct that a person referred to in clause (ii) be released on bail if it is satisfied that it is just and proper so to do for any other special reason: Provided also that the mere fact that an accused person may be required for being 20 identified by witnesses during investigation shall not be sufficient ground for refusing to grant bail if he is otherwise entitled to be released on bail and gives an undertaking that he shall comply with such directions as may be given by the Court: Provided also that no person shall, if the offence alleged to have been committed by him is punishable with death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for seven years or 25 more, be released on bail by the Court under this sub-section without giving an opportunity of hearing to the Public Prosecutor. (2) If it appears to such officer or Court at any stage of the investigation, inquiry or trial, as the case may be, that there are not reasonable grounds for believing that the accused has committed a non-bailable offence, but that there are sufficient grounds for 30 further inquiry into his guilt, the accused shall, subject to the provisions of section 494 and pending such inquiry, be released on bail, or, at the discretion of such officer or Court, on the execution by him of a bond without sureties for his appearance as hereinafter provided. (3) When a person accused or suspected of the commission of an offence punishable with imprisonment which may extend to seven years or more or of an offence under 35 Chapter VI, Chapter XVI or Chapter XVII of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 or abatement of, or conspiracy or attempt to commit, any such offence, is released on bail under sub-section (1), the Court shall impose the conditions,— (a) that such person shall attend in accordance with the conditions of the bond executed under this Chapter; 40 (b) that such person shall not commit an offence similar to the offence of which he is accused, or suspected, of the commission of which he is suspected; and (c) that such person shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer or tamper with the 45 evidence, and may also impose, in the interests of justice, such other conditions as it considers necessary. (4) An officer or a Court releasing any person on bail under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), shall record in writing his or its reasons or special reasons for so doing. (5) Any Court which has released a person on bail under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), may, if it considers it necessary so to do, direct that such person be arrested and commit him to custody. (6) If, in any case triable by a Magistrate, the trial of a person accused of any non-bailable offence is not concluded within a period of sixty days from the first date fixed 5 for taking evidence in the case, such person shall, if he is in custody during the whole of the said period, be released on bail to the satisfaction of the Magistrate, unless for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Magistrate otherwise directs. (7) If, at any time, after the conclusion of the trial of a person accused of a non-bailable offence and before judgment is delivered, the Court is of opinion that there are 10 reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is not guilty of any such offence, it shall release the accused, if he is in custody, on the execution by him of a bond without sureties for his appearance to hear judgment delivered. Bail to require 483. (1) Before conclusion of the trial and before disposal of the appeal, the Court accused to trying the offence or the Appellate Court, as the case may be, shall require the accused to 15 appear before execute bond or bail bond, to appear before the higher Court as and when such Court issues next Appellate Court. notice in respect of any appeal or petition filed against the judgment of the respective Court and such bond shall be in force for six months. (2) If such accused fails to appear, the bond stand forfeited and the procedure under section 493 shall apply. 20 Direction for 484. (1) When any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on an grant of bail accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or to person the Court of Session for a direction under this section; and that Court may, if it thinks fit, apprehending direct that in the event of such arrest, he shall be released on bail. arrest. (2) When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a direction under 25 sub-section (1), it may include such conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of the particular case, as it may think fit, including— (i) a condition that the person shall make himself available for interrogation by a police officer as and when required; (ii) a condition that the person shall not, directly or indirectly, make any 30 inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer; (iii) a condition that the person shall not leave India without the previous permission of the Court; (iv) such other condition as may be imposed under sub-section (3) of 35 section 482, as if the bail were granted under that section. (3) If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station on such accusation, and is prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time while in the custody of such officer to give bail, he shall be released on bail; and if a Magistrate taking cognizance of such offence decides that a warrant should be issued in 40 the first instance against that person, he shall issue a bailable warrant in conformity with the direction of the Court under sub-section (1). (4) Nothing in this section shall apply to any case involving the arrest of any person on accusation of having committed an offence under sub-section (2) of section 64 or section 66 or section 70 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 45 Special powers 485. (1) A High Court or Court of Session may direct,— of High Court or Court of (a) that any person accused of an offence and in custody be released on bail, Session and if the offence is of the nature specified in sub-section (3) of section 482, may regarding bail. impose any condition which it considers necessary for the purposes mentioned in that sub-section; 50 (b) that any condition imposed by a Magistrate when releasing any person on bail be set aside or modified: Provided that the High Court or the Court of Session shall, before granting bail to a person who is accused of an offence which is triable exclusively by the Court of Session or 5 which, though not so triable, is punishable with imprisonment for life, give notice of the application for bail to the Public Prosecutor unless it is, for reasons to be recorded in writing, of opinion that it is not practicable to give such notice: Provided further that the High Court or the Court of Session shall, before granting bail to a person who is accused of an offence triable under section 64 or section 70 of the 10 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, give notice of the application for bail to the Public Prosecutor within a period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the notice of such application. (1A) The presence of the informant or any person authorised by him shall be obligatory at the time of hearing of the application for bail to the person under section 64 or section 66 or section 70 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 15 (2) A High Court or Court of Session may direct that any person who has been released on bail under this Chapter be arrested and commit him to custody. 486. (1) The amount of every bond executed under this Chapter shall be fixed with Amount of due regard to the circumstances of the case and shall not be excessive. bond and reduction (2) The High Court or the Court of Session may direct that the bail required by a police thereof. 20 officer or Magistrate be reduced. 487. (1) Before any person is released on bail or released on his own bond, a bond for Bond of accused and such sum of money as the police officer or Court, as the case may be, thinks sufficient shall sureties. be executed by such person, and, when he is released on bail, by one or more sufficient sureties conditioned that such person shall attend at the time and place mentioned in the 25 bond, and shall continue so to attend until otherwise directed by the police officer or Court, as the case may be. (2) Where any condition is imposed for the release of any person on bail, the bond shall also contain that condition. (3) If the case so requires, the bond shall also bind the person released on bail to 30 appear when called upon at the High Court, Court of Session or other Court to answer the charge. (4) For the purpose of determining whether the sureties are fit or sufficient, the Court may accept affidavits in proof of the facts contained therein relating to the sufficiency or fitness of the sureties, or, if it considers necessary, may either hold an enquiry itself or cause 35 an inquiry to be made by a Magistrate subordinate to the Court, as to such sufficiency or fitness. 488. Every person standing surety to an accused person for his release on bail, shall Declaration by sureties. make a declaration before the Court as to the number of persons to whom he has stood surety including the accused, giving therein all the relevant particulars. Discharge 40 489. (1) As soon as the bond has been executed, the person for whose appearance it from custody. has been executed shall be released; and, when he is in jail, the court admitting him to bail shall issue an order of release to the officer in charge of the jail, and such officer on receipt of the orders shall release him. (2) Nothing in this section, section 480 or section 482, shall be deemed to require the 45 release of any person liable to be detained for some matter other than that in respect of which the bond was executed. Power to 490. If, through mistake, fraud or otherwise, insufficient sureties have been accepted, order or if they afterwards become insufficient, the Court may issue a warrant of arrest directing sufficient bail that the person released on bail be brought before it and may order him to find sufficient when that first sureties, and, on his failing so to do, may commit him to jail. taken is insufficient. Discharge of 491. (1) All or any sureties for the attendance and appearance of a person released on 5 sureties. bail may at any time apply to a Magistrate to discharge the bond, either wholly or so far as relates to the applicants. (2) On such application being made, the Magistrate shall issue his warrant of arrest directing that the person so released be brought before him. (3) On the appearance of such person pursuant to the warrant, or on his voluntary 10 surrender, the Magistrate shall direct the bond to be discharged either wholly or so far as relates to the applicants, and shall call upon such person to find other sufficient sureties, and, if he fails to do so, may commit him to jail. Deposit 492. When any person is required by any Court or officer to execute a bond with or instead of without sureties, such Court or officer may, except in the case of a bond for good behaviour, 15 recognizance. permit him to deposit a sum of money or Government promissory notes to such amount as the Court or officer may fix in lieu of executing such bond. Procedure 493. (1) Where a bond under this Sanhita is for appearance, or for production of when bond has property, before a Court and it is proved to the satisfaction of that Court, or of any Court to been forfeited. which the case has subsequently been transferred, that the bond has been forfeited, 20 or where, in respect of any other bond under this Sanhita, it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court by which the bond was taken, or of any Court to which the case has subsequently been transferred, or of the Court of any Magistrate of the first class, that the bond has been forfeited, the Court shall record the grounds of such proof, and may call upon any person bound by 25 such bond to pay the penalty thereof or to show cause why it should not be paid. Explanation.—A condition in a bond for appearance, or for production of property, before a Court shall be construed as including a condition for appearance, or as the case may be, for production of property, before any Court to which the case may subsequently be transferred. 30 (2) If sufficient cause is not shown and the penalty is not paid, the Court may proceed to recover the same as if such penalty were a fine imposed by it under this Sanhita: Provided that where such penalty is not paid and cannot be recovered in the manner aforesaid, the person so bound as surety shall be liable, by order of the Court ordering the recovery of the penalty, to imprisonment in civil jail for a term which may extend to six 35 months. (3) The Court may, after recording its reasons for doing so, remit any portion of the penalty mentioned and enforce payment in part only. (4) Where a surety to a bond dies before the bond is forfeited, his estate shall be discharged from all liability in respect of the bond. 40 (5) Where any person who has furnished security under section 125 or section 136 or section 401 is convicted of an offence the commission of which constitutes a breach of the conditions of his bond, or of a bond executed in lieu of his bond under section 496, a certified copy of the judgment of the Court by which he was convicted of such offence may be used as evidence in proceedings under this section against his surety or sureties, and, 45 if such certified copy is so used, the Court shall presume that such offence was committed by him unless the contrary is proved. 494. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 493, where a bond under this Cancellation Sanhita is for appearance of a person in a case and it is forfeited for breach of a condition,— of bond and bail bond. (a) the bond executed by such person as well as the bond, if any, executed by one or more of his sureties in that case shall stand cancelled; and 5 (b) thereafter no such person shall be released only on his own bond in that case, if the Police Officer or the Court, as the case may be, for appearance before whom the bond was executed, is satisfied that there was no sufficient cause for the failure of the person bound by the bond to comply with its condition: Provided that subject to any other provisions of this Sanhita he may be released in 10 that case upon the execution of a fresh personal bond for such sum of money and bond by one or more of such sureties as the police officer or the Court, as the case may be, thinks sufficient. 495. When any surety to a bond under this Sanhita becomes insolvent or dies, or Procedure in when any bond is forfeited under the provisions of section 493, the Court by whose order case of insolvency or 15 such bond was taken, or a Magistrate of the first class may order the person from whom death of such security was demanded to furnish fresh securities in accordance with the directions of surety or when the original order, and if such security is not furnished, such Court or Magistrate may a bond is proceed as if there had been a default in complying with such original order. forfeited. 496. When the person required by any Court, or officer to execute a bond is a minor, Bond required 20 such Court or officer may accept, in lieu thereof, a bond executed by a surety or sureties from minor. only. 497. All orders passed under section 493 shall be appealable,— Appeal from orders under (i) in the case of an order made by a Magistrate, to the Sessions Judge; section 446. (ii) in the case of an order made by a Court of Session, to the Court to which an 25 appeal lies from an order made by such Court. 498. The High Court or Court of Sessions may direct any Magistrate to levy the Power to amount due on a bond for appearance or attendance at such High Court or Court of Session. direct levy of amount due on CHAPTER XXXVI certain recognizances. DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY 30 499. When any property is produced before any Criminal Court or the Magistrate Order for custody and empowered to take cognizance or commit the case for trial during any investigation, inquiry disposal of or trial, the Court or the Magistrate may make such order as it thinks fit for the proper property custody of such property pending the conclusion of the investigation, inquiry or trial, and, pending trial if the property is subject to speedy and natural decay, or if it is otherwise expedient so to do, in certain 35 the Court or the Magistrate may, after recording such evidence as it thinks necessary, order cases. it to be sold or otherwise disposed of. Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "property" includes— (a) property of any kind or document which is produced before the Court or which is in its custody; 40 (b) any property regarding which an offence appears to have been committed or which appears to have been used for the commission of any offence. (2) The Court or the Magistrate shall, within a period of fourteen days from the production of the property referred to in sub-section (1) before it, prepare a statement of such property containing its description in such form and manner as the State Government 45 may, by rules, provide. (3) The Court or the Magistrate shall cause to be taken the photograph and if necessary, videograph on mobile phone or any electronic media, of the property referred to in sub-section (1). (4) The statement prepared under sub-section (2) and the photograph or the videography taken under sub-section (3) shall be used as evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under the Sanhita. (5) The Court or the Magistrate shall, within a period of thirty days after the statement has been prepared under sub-section (2) and the photograph or the videography has been 5 taken under sub-section (3), order the disposal, destruction, confiscation or delivery of the property in the manner specified hereinafter. Order for 500. (1) When an investigation, inquiry or trial in any Criminal Court is concluded, the disposal of Court or the Magistrate may make such order as it thinks fit for the disposal, by destruction, property at confiscation or delivery to any person claiming to be entitled to possession thereof or 10 conclusion of otherwise, of any property or document produced before it or in its custody, or regarding trial. which any offence appears to have been committed, or which has been used for the commission of any offence. (2) An order may be made under sub-section (1) for the delivery of any property to any person claiming to be entitled to the possession thereof, without any condition or on 15 condition that he executes a bond, with or without securities, to the satisfaction of the Court or the Magistrate, engaging to restore such property to the Court if the order made under sub-section (1) is modified or set aside on appeal or revision. (3) A Court of Session may, instead of itself making an order under sub-section (1), direct the property to be delivered to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, who shall thereupon 20 deal with it in the manner provided in sections 505, 506 and 507. (4) Except where the property is livestock or is subject to speedy and natural decay, or where a bond has been executed in pursuance of sub-section (2), an order made under sub-section (1) shall not be carried out for two months, or when an appeal is presented, until such appeal has been disposed of. 25 (5) In this section, the term "property" includes, in the case of property regarding which an offence appears to have been committed, not only such property as has been originally in the possession or under the control of any party, but also any property into or for which the same may have been converted or exchanged, and anything acquired by such conversion or exchange, whether immediately or otherwise. 30 Payment to 501. When any person is convicted of any offence which includes, or amounts to, innocent theft or receiving stolen property, and it is proved that any other person bought the stolen purchaser of property from him without knowing or having reason to believe that the same was stolen, money found and that any money has on his arrest been taken out of the possession of the convicted on accused. person, the Court may, on the application of such purchaser and on the restitution of the 35 stolen property to the person entitled to the possession thereof, order that out of such money a sum not exceeding the price paid by such purchaser be delivered to him within six months from the date of such order. Appeal against 502. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by a Court under section 500 or orders under section 501, may appeal against it to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from convictions 40 section 500 or by the former Court. section 501. (2) On such appeal, the Appellate Court may direct the order to be stayed pending disposal of the appeal, or may modify, alter or annul the order and make any further orders that may be just. (3) The powers referred to in sub-section (2) may also be exercised by a Court of 45 appeal, confirmation or revision while dealing with the case in which the order referred to in sub-section (1) was made. Destruction of 503. (1) On a conviction under section 292, section 293, section 354 of the Bhartiya libellous and Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the Court may order the destruction of all the copies of the thing in other matter. respect of which the conviction was had, and which are in the custody of the Court or 50 remain in the possession or power of the person convicted. (2) The Court may, in like manner, on a conviction under section 272, section 273, section 274 or section 275 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, order the food, drink, drug or medical preparation in respect of which the conviction was had, to be destroyed. 504. (1) When a person is convicted of an offence by use of criminal force or show of Power to 5 force or by criminal intimidation, and it appears to the Court that, by such use of force or restore show of force or intimidation, any person has been dispossessed of any immovable property, possession of immovable the Court may, if it thinks fit, order that possession of the same be restored to that person property. after evicting by force, if necessary, any other person who may be in possession of the property: 10 Provided that no such order shall be made by the Court more than one month after the date of the conviction. (2) Where the Court trying the offence has not made an order under sub-section (1), the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision may, if it thinks fit, make such order while disposing of the appeal, reference or revision, as the case may be. 15 (3) Where an order has been made under sub-section (1), the provisions of section 502 shall apply in relation thereto as they apply in relation to an order under section 501. (4) No order made under this section shall prejudice any right or interest to or in such immovable property which any person may be able to establish in a civil suit. 505. (1) Whenever the seizure of property by any police officer is reported to a Procedure by 20 Magistrate under the provisions of this Sanhita, and such property is not produced before police upon a Criminal Court during an inquiry or trial, the Magistrate may make such order as he thinks seizure of property. fit respecting the disposal of such property or the delivery of such property to the person entitled to the possession thereof, or if such person cannot be ascertained, respecting the custody and production of such property. 25 (2) If the person so entitled is known, the Magistrate may order the property to be delivered to him on such conditions (if any) as the Magistrate thinks fit and if such person is unknown, the Magistrate may detain it and shall, in such case, issue a proclamation specifying the articles of which such property consists, and requiring any person who may have a claim thereto, to appear before him and establish his claim within six months from the 30 date of such proclamation. 506. (1) If no person within such period establishes his claim to such property, and if Procedure the person in whose possession such property was found is unable to show that it was where no claimant legally acquired by him, the Magistrate may by order direct that such property shall be at appears within the disposal of the State Government and may be sold by that Government and the proceeds six months. 35 of such sale shall be dealt with in such manner as the State Government may, by rules, provide. (2) An appeal shall lie against any such order to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from convictions by the Magistrate. 507. If the person entitled to the possession of such property is unknown or absent Power to sell 40 and the property is subject to speedy and natural decay, or if the Magistrate to whom its perishable seizure is reported is of opinion that its sale would be for the benefit of the owner, or that the property. value of such property is less than ten thousand rupees, the Magistrate may at any time direct it to be sold; and the provisions of sections 505 and 506 shall, as nearly as may be practicable, apply to the net proceeds of such sale. 45 CHAPTER XXXVII IRREGULAR PROCEEDINGS 508. If any Magistrate not empowered by law to do any of the following things, Irregularities namely:— which do not vitiate (a) to issue a search-warrant under section 97; proceedings. 50 (b) to order, under section 174, the police to investigate an offence; (c) to hold an inquest under section 196; (d) to issue process under section 207, for the apprehension of a person within his local jurisdiction who has committed an offence outside the limits of such jurisdiction; (e) to take cognizance of an offence under clause (a) or clause (b) of 5 sub-section (1) of section 210; (f) to make over a case under sub-section (2) of section 212; (g) to tender a pardon under section 343; (h) to recall a case and try it himself under section 451; or (i) to sell property under section 506 or section 507, 10 erroneously in good faith does that thing, his proceedings shall not be set aside merely on the ground of his not being so empowered. Irregularities 509. If any Magistrate, not being empowered by law in this behalf, does any of the which vitiate following things, namely:— proceedings. (a) attaches and sells property under section 85; 15 (b) issues a search-warrant for a document, parcel or other things in the custody of a postal or telegraph authority; (c) demands security to keep the peace; (d) demands security for good behaviour; (e) discharges a person lawfully bound to be of good behaviour; 20 (f) cancels a bond to keep the peace; (g) makes an order for maintenance; (h) makes an order under section 152 as to a local nuisance; (i) prohibits, under section 162, the repetition or continuance of a public nuisance; 25 (j) makes an order under Part C or Part D of Chapter XI; (k) takes cognizance of an offence under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 210; (l) tries an offender; (m) tries an offender summarily; 30 (n) passes a sentence, under section 364, on proceedings recorded by another Magistrate; (o) decides an appeal; (p) calls, under section 438, for proceedings; or (q) revises an order passed under section 493, 35 his proceedings shall be void. Proceedings in 510. No finding, sentence or order of any Criminal Court shall be set aside merely on wrong place. the ground that the inquiry, trial or other proceedings in the course of which it was arrived at or passed, took place in a wrong sessions division, district, sub-division or other local area, unless it appears that such error has in fact occasioned a failure of justice. 40 511. (1) If any Court before which a confession or other statement of an accused Non- person recorded, or purporting to be recorded under section 183 or section 316, is tendered, compliance with provisions or has been received, in evidence finds that any of the provisions of either of such sections of section 183 have not been complied with by the Magistrate recording the statement, it may, or section 316. 5 notwithstanding anything contained in section 94 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adiniyam 2023, take evidence in regard to such non-compliance, and may, if satisfied that such non-compliance has not injured the accused in his defence on the merits and that he duly made the statement recorded, admit such statement. (2) The provisions of this section apply to Courts of appeal, reference and revision. 10 512. (1) No finding, sentence or order by a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be Effect of deemed invalid merely on the ground that no charge was framed or on the ground of any omission to frame, or error, omission or irregularity in the charge including any misjoinder of charges, unless, in absence of, or the opinion of the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision, a failure of justice has in fact error in, been occasioned thereby. charge. 15 (2) If the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision, is of opinion that a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned, it may,— (a) in the case of an omission to frame a charge, order that a charge be framed, and that the trial be recommended from the point immediately after the framing of the charge; 20 (b) in the case of an error, omission or irregularity in the charge, direct a new trial to be had upon a charge framed in whatever manner it thinks fit: Provided that if the Court is of opinion that the facts of the case are such that no valid charge could be preferred against the accused in respect of the facts proved, it shall quash the conviction. 25 513. (1) Subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained, no finding, sentence or Finding or order passed by a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be reversed or altered by a Court of sentence when reversible by appeal, confirmation of revision on account of any error, omission or irregularity in the reason of complaint, summons, warrant, proclamation, order, judgment or other proceedings before or error, during trial or in any inquiry or other proceedings under this Sanhita, or any error, or omission or 30 irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution, unless in the opinion of that Court, a failure irregularity. of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby. (2) In determining whether any error, omission or irregularity in any proceeding under this Sanhita, or any error, or irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution has occasioned a failure of justice, the Court shall have regard to the fact whether the objection could and 35 should have been raised at an earlier stage in the proceedings. 514. No attachment made under this Sanhita shall be deemed unlawful, nor shall any Defect or person making the same be deemed a trespasser, on account of any defect or want of form error not to in the summons, conviction, writ of attachment or other proceedings relating thereto. make attachment unlawful. CHAPTER XXXVIII 40 LIMITATION FOR TAKING COGNIZANCE OF CERTAIN OFFENCES 515. For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, "period Definitions. of limitation" means the period specified in section 517 for taking cognizance of an offence. 516. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Sanhita, no Court shall take cognizance Bar to taking of an offence of the category specified in sub-section (2), after the expiry of the period of cognizance 45 limitation. after lapse of period of (2) The period of limitation shall be— limitation. (a) six months, if the offence is punishable with fine only; (b) one year, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year; (c) three years, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding one year but not exceeding three years. (3) For the purposes of this section, the period of limitation, in relation to offences which may be tried together, shall be determined with reference to the offence which is punishable with the more severe punishment or, as the case may be, the most severe 5 punishment. Explanation.—For the purpose of computing the period of limitation, the relevant date shall be the date of filing complaint under section 223 or the date of recording of information under section 173. Commencement 517. (1) The period of limitation, in relation to an offender, shall commence,— 10 of period of (a) on the date of the offence; or limitation. (b) where the commission of the offence was not known to the person aggrieved by the offence or to any police officer, the first day on which such offence comes to the knowledge of such person or to any police officer, whichever is earlier; or (c) where it is not known by whom the offence was committed, the first day on 15 which the identity of the offender is known to the person aggrieved by the offence or to the police officer making investigation into the offence, whichever is earlier. (2) In computing the said period, the day from which such period is to be computed shall be excluded. Exclusion of 518. (1) In computing the period of limitation, the time during which any person has 20 time in been prosecuting with due diligence another prosecution, whether in a Court of first instance certain cases. or in a Court of appeal or revision, against the offender, shall be excluded: Provided that no such exclusion shall be made unless the prosecution relates to the same facts and is prosecuted in good faith in a Court which from defect of jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature, is unable to entertain it. 25 (2) Where the institution of the prosecution in respect of an offence has been stayed by an injunction or order, then, in computing the period of limitation, the period of the continuance of the injunction or order, the day on which it was issued or made, and the day on which it was withdrawn, shall be excluded. (3) Where notice of prosecution for an offence has been given, or where, under any 30 law for the time being in force, the previous consent or sanction of the Government or any other authority is required for the institution of any prosecution for an offence, then, in computing the period of limitation, the period of such notice or, as the case may be, the time required for obtaining such consent or sanction shall be excluded. Explanation.—In computing the time required for obtaining the consent or sanction 35 of the Government or any other authority, the date on which the application was made for obtaining the consent or sanction and the date of receipt of the order of the Government or other authority shall both be excluded. (4) In computing the period of limitation, the time during which the offender— (a) has been absent from India or from any territory outside India which is 40 under the administration of the Central Government; or (b) has avoided arrest by absconding or concealing himself, shall be excluded. Exclusion of 519. Where the period of limitation expires on a day when the Court is closed, the date on which Court may take cognizance on the day on which the Court reopens. 45 Court is closed. Explanation.—A Court shall be deemed to be closed on any day within the meaning of this section, if, during its normal working hours, it remains closed on that day. 520. In the case of a continuing offence, a fresh period of limitation shall begin to run Continuing at every moment of the time during which the offence continues. offence. 521. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, Extension of any Court may take cognizance of an offence after the expiry of the period of limitation, if it period of limitation in 5 is satisfied on the facts and in the circumstances of the case that the delay has been certain cases. properly explained or that it is necessary so to do in the interests of justice. CHAPTER XXXIX MISCELLANEOUS 522. When an offence is tried by the High Court otherwise than under section 448, it Trials before 10 shall, in the trial of the offence, observe the same procedure as a Court of Sessions would High Courts. observe if it were trying the case. 46 of 1950. 523. (1) The Central Government may make rules consistent with this Sanhita and the Delivery to 62 of 1957. Army Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957, and the Air Force Act, 1950, and any other law, relating commanding 45 of 1950. to the Armed Forces of the Union, for the time being in force, as to cases in which persons officers of persons liable 15 subject to military, naval or air-force law, or such other law, shall be tried by a Court to which to be tried by this Sanhita applies, or by a Court-martial; and when any person is brought before a Magistrate Court-martial. and charged with an offence for which he is liable to be tried either by a Court to which this Sanhita applies or by a Court-martial, such Magistrate shall have regard to such rules, and shall in proper cases deliver him, together with a statement of the offence of which he is 20 accused, to the commanding officer of the unit to which he belongs, or to the commanding officer of the nearest military, naval or air-force station, as the case may be, for the purpose of being tried by a Court-martial. Explanation.—In this section— (a) "Unit" includes a regiment, corps, ship, detachment, group, battalion or 25 Company; (b) "Court-martial" includes any Tribunal with the powers similar to those of a Court-martial constituted under the relevant law applicable to the Armed Forces of the Union. (2) Every Magistrate shall, on receiving a written application for that purpose by the 30 commanding officer of any unit or body of soldiers, sailors or airmen stationed or employed at any such place, use his utmost endeavours to apprehend and secure any person accused of such offence. (3) A High Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that a prisoner detained in any jail situate within the State be brought before a Court-martial for trial or to be examined touching any 35 matter pending before the Court-martial. 524. Subject to the power conferred by article 227 of the Constitution, the forms set Forms. forth in the Second Schedule, with such variations as the circumstances of each case require, may be used for the respective purposes therein mentioned, and if used shall be sufficient. 40 525. (1) Every High Court may, with the previous approval of the State Government, Power of High make rules— Court to make rules. (a) as to the persons who may be permitted to act as petition-writers in the Criminal Courts subordinate to it; (b) regulating the issue of licences to such persons, the conduct of business by 45 them, and the scale of fees to be charged by them; (c) providing a penalty for a contravention of any of the rules so made and determining the authority by which such contravention may be investigated and the penalties imposed; (d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, provided by rules made 50 by the State Government. (2) All rules made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette. Power to alter 526. If the Legislative Assembly of a State by a resolution so permits, the State functions Government may, after consultation with the High Court, by notification, direct that references allocated to in sections 127, 128, 129, 164 and 166 to an Executive Magistrate shall be construed as Executive references to a Judicial Magistrate of the first class. 5 Magistrate in certain cases. Case in which 527. No Judge or Magistrate shall, except with the permission of the Court to which Judge or an appeal lies from his Court, try or commit for trial any case to or in which he is a party, or Magistrate is personally interested, and no Judge or Magistrate shall hear an appeal from any judgment personally or order passed or made by himself. interested. Explanation.—A Judge or Magistrate shall not be deemed to be a party to, or 10 personally interested in, any case by reason only that he is concerned therein in a public capacity, or by reason only that he has viewed the place in which an offence is alleged to have been committed, or any other place in which any other transaction material to the case is alleged to have occurred, and made an inquiry in connection with the case. Practicing 528. No advocate who practices in the Court of any Magistrate shall sit as a Magistrate 15 advocate not in that Court or in any Court within the local jurisdiction of that Court. to sit as Magistrate in certain Courts. Public servant 529. A public servant having any duty to perform in connection with the sale of any 20 concerned in property under this Sanhita shall not purchase or bid for the property. sale not to purchase or bid for property. Saving of 530. Nothing in this Sanhita shall be deemed to limit or affect the inherent powers of inherent the High Court to make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to any order under 25 powers of this Sanhita, or to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the High Court. ends of justice. Duty of High 531. Every High Court shall so exercise its superintendence over the Courts of Sessions Court to and Courts of Judicial Magistrates subordinate to it as to ensure that there is an expeditious exercise and proper disposal of cases by the Judges and Magistrates. 30 continuous superintendence over Courts. Trial and 532. All trials, inquires and proceedings under this Code, including— proceedings to (i) summons and warrant, issuance, service and execution thereof; be held in electronic (ii) holding of inquiry; mode. (iii) examination of complainant and witnesses; (iv) trial before a Court of Session, trial in warrant cases, trial in summons-cases, 40 summary trials and plea bargaining; (v) recording of evidence in inquiries and trials; (vi) trials before High Courts; (vii) all appellate proceedings and such other proceedings, may be held in electronic mode, by use of electronic communication or use of audio-video 45 electronic means. Repeal and 533. (1) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is hereby repealed. 2 of 1974. savings. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal— (a) if, immediately before the date on which this Sanhita comes into force, there is any appeal, application, trial, inquiry or investigation pending, then, such appeal, application, trial, inquiry or investigation shall be disposed of, continued, held or made, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal 2 of 1974. 5 Procedure, 1973, as in force immediately before such commencement (hereinafter referred to as the old Code), as if this Sanhita had not come into force: Provided that every inquiry under Chapter XIV of the Old Code, which is pending at the commencement of this Sanhita, shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Sanhita; 10 (b) all notifications published, proclamations issued, powers conferred, forms provided by rules local jurisdictions defined, sentences passed and orders, rules and appointments, not being appointments as Special Magistrates, made under the Old Code and which are in force immediately before the commencement of this Sanhita, shall be deemed, respectively, to have been published, issued, conferred, specified, 15 defined, passed or made under the corresponding provisions of this Sanhita; (c) any sanction accorded or consent given under the Old Code in pursuance of which no proceeding was commenced under that Code, shall be deemed to have been accorded or given under the corresponding provisions of this Sanhita and proceedings may be commenced under this Sanhita in pursuance of such sanction of consent; 20 (d) the provisions of the Old Code shall continue to apply in relation to every prosecution against a Ruler within the meaning of article 363 of the Constitution. (3) Where the period specified for an application or other proceeding under the Old Code had expired on or before the commencement of this Sanhita, nothing in this Sanhita shall be construed as enabling any such application to be made or proceeding to be 25 commenced under this Sanhita by reason only of the fact that a longer period therefor is specified by this Sanhita or provisions are made in this Sanhita for the extension of time. THE FIRST SCHEDULE CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES EXPLANATORY NOTES: (1) In regard to offences under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, the entries in the second and third columns against a section the number of which is given in the first column are not intended as the definition of, and the punishment prescribed for, the offence in the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, but merely as indication of the substance of the section. (2) In this Schedule, (i) the expression “Magistrate of the first class” and “Any Magistrate” but not including Executive Magistrates; (ii) the word “cognizable” stands for “a police officer may arrest without warrant”; and (iii) the word “non-cognizable” stands for “a police officer shall not arrest without warrant”. I. –OFFENCES UNDER THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA Section Offence Punishment Cognizable or non- Bailable or Non- By what cognizable bailable Court triable 1 2 3 4 5 6 49 Punishment of abetment if the act abetted is Same as for According as According as Court by committed in consequence and where no express offence abetted. offence abetted is offence abetted which provision is made for its punishment. cognizable or non- is bailable or offence cognizable. non- bailable. abetted is triable. 50 Punishment of abetment if person abetted does Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. act with different intention from that of abettor. 51 Liability of abettor when one act abetted and Same as for Ditto Ditto Ditto. different act done offence intended to be abetted. 52 Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment Same as for Ditto Ditto Ditto for act abetted and for act done. offence committed. 53 Liability of abettor for an effect caused by the act Same as for Ditto Ditto Ditto. abetted different from that intended by the offence abettor. committed. 54 Abettor present when offence is committed. Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 55 (1) Abetment of offence punishable with death Imprisonment for Ditto Non-bailable Ditto. or imprisonment for life. 7 years and fine. (2) If an act which causes harm be done in Imprisonment for Ditto Ditto Ditto. consequence of the abetment. 14 years and fine. 56 (1) Abetment of offence punishable with Imprisonment Ditto According as Ditto. imprisonment. extending to a quarter offence abetted part of the longest term is bailable or provided for the non- bailable. offence, or fine, or both. (2) If the abettor or the person abetted be a one-half of the longest Ditto Ditto Ditto. public servant whose duty it is to prevent the term provided for that offence. offence, or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 57 Abetting commission of offence by the public imprisonment of either According as offence According as Court by or by more than ten persons. description for a term which abetted is cognizable offence abetted is which offence may extend to seven years or non-cognizable. bailable or non- abetted is and with fine bailable. triable. 58 Concealing design to commit offence (i) if that offence be Ditto non- bailable. Ditto punishable with death or imprisonment for committed, be punished life. with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years; or (ii) if the offence be not Ditto bailable Ditto committed, with imprisonment of either description, for a term which may extend to three years, 59 A public servant concealing a design to Imprisonment extending to Ditto According as Ditto. commit an offence which it is his duty to half of the longest term offence abetted is prevent, if the offence be committed. provided for the offence, or bailable or non- fine, or both. bailable. If the offence be punishable with death or Imprisonment for 10 years. Ditto Non-bailable. Ditto. imprisonment for life. If the offence be not committed. Imprisonment extending to Ditto Bailable. Ditto. a quarter part of the longest term provided for the offence, or fine, or both. 60 Concealing a design to commit an offence Ditto Ditto According as Ditto. punishable with imprisonment, if offence be offence abetted is committed. bailable or non- bailable. If the offence be not committed. Imprisonment extending to Ditto Bailable. Ditto. one-eighth part of the longest term provided for the offence, or fine, or both. 61 Criminal conspiracy to commit Same as for abetment of the offence According as the According Court by which an offence punishable with which is the object of the conspiracy. offence which is as offence abetment of the death, imprisonment for life or the object of which is offence which rigorous imprisonment for a conspiracy is object of is the object of term of 2 years or upwards. cognizable or conspiracy conspiracy is non- cognizable. is bailable triable. or non- bailable. Any other criminal conspiracy. Imprisonment for 6 months, or fine, or Non-cognizable. Bailable. Magistrate of both. the first class. 62 Attempting to commit offences Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment According as the According as The court by punishable with imprisonment for not exceeding half.of the longest term, offence is the offence which the life, or imprisonment, and in such provided for the offence, or fine, or both cognizable or non- attempted by offence attempt doing any act towards the cognizable. the offender attempted is commission of the offence. is bailable or not. triable. 64 (1) Rape. Rigorous imprisonment of not less than Cognizable Non- Court of 10 years but which may extend to bailable Session. imprisonment for life and with fine. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 64 (2) Rape by a police officer or a public Rigorous imprisonment of not less Cognizable Non- Court of servant or member of armed forces than 10 years but which may extend bailable Session. or a person being on the to imprisonment for life which shall management or on the staff of a mean the remainder of that person’s jail, remand home or other place of natural life and with fine. custody or women’s or children’s institution or by a person on the management or on the staff of a hospital, and rape committed by a person in a position of trust or authority towards the person raped or by a near relative of the person raped. 65(1) Persons committing offence of Rigorous imprisonment for a term Cognizable Non- Court of rape on a woman under sixteen which shall not be less than 20 years bailable Session. years of age. but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life and with fine. 65(2) Punishment for rape in certain Rigorous imprisonment for a term Cognizable Non- Court of cases. which shall not be less than twenty bailable Session. years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, and shall also be liable to fine. Rigorous imprisonment of not less than 20 years but which may extend to imprisonment for life which shall mean imprisonment for that person’s natural life and with fine or with death. 66 Person committing an offence of Rigorous imprisonment of not less Cognizable Non- Court of rape and inflicting injury which than 20 years but which may extend bailable Session. causes death or causes the woman to imprisonment for life which shall to be in a persistent vegetative mean imprisonment for the remainder state. of that person’s natural life or with death. 67 Sexual intercourse by husband upon Imprisonment for not less than 2 years Cognizable Bailable Court of his wife during separation or by a but which may extend to 7 years and Session. person in authority. with fine. 68 Sexual intercourse by a person in rigorous imprisonment of either Cognizable Non- Court of authority. description for a term which shall not bailable Session be less than five years, but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 69 Sexual intercourse by employing imprisonment of either description for a Cognizable Non- Court of deceitful means etc. term which may extend to ten years and bailable Session shall also be liable to fine 70 (1) Gang rape Rigorous imprisonment for not less Cognizable Non- Court of than 20 years but which may extend to bailable Session. imprisonment for life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life and with fine. 70 (2) Gang rape on a woman under Imprisonment for life which shall mean Cognizable Non- Court of eighteen years of age. imprisonment for the remainder of that bailable Session. person’s natural life and with fine or with death. 71 Repeat offenders. Imprisonment for life which shall mean Cognizable Non- Court of imprisonment for the remainder of that bailable Session. person’s natural life or with death. 1 2 3 4 5 6 72 (1) Disclosure of identity of the Imprisonment for two years and fine. Cognizable Ditto Any Magistrate. victim of certain offences, etc. 72 (3) Printing or publication of a Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto proceeding without prior permission of court. 73 Assault or use of criminal force to Imprisonment of 1 year which may extend Cognizable Non-bailable Any woman with intent to outrage her to 5 years, and with fine. Magistrate modesty. 74 Sexual harassment and Rigorous imprisonment with three years, Cognizable Bailable Any punishment for sexual harassment. or with fine, or with both. Magistrate Offence specified in clause (iv) of One year, or with fine, or with both. sub-section (1). 75 Assault or use of criminal force to Imprisonment of not less than 3 years but Cognizable Non-bailable Any woman with intent to disrobe. which may extend to 7 years and with fine. Magistrate. 76 Voyeurism. Imprisonment of not less than 1 year but Cognizable Bailable Any which may extend to 3 years and with fine Magistrate. for first conviction. Imprisonment of not less than 3 years but Cognizable Non-bailable Any which may extend 7 years and with fine Magistrate for second or subsequent conviction. 77 Stalking. Imprisonment up to 3 years and with Cognizable Bailable Any fine for first conviction. Magistrate. Imprisonment up to 5 years and with fine Cognizable Non-bailable Any for second or subsequent conviction. Magistrate. 78 Uttering any word or making any Simple imprisonment for 3 years and with Cognizable Ditto Ditto. gesture intended to insult the fine. modesty of a woman, etc. 79 Dowry death. seven years but which may extend to Ditto Non-bailable Court of imprisonment for life. Session. 80 A man by deceit causing a woman Imprisonment for 10 years and fine. Non- Non-bailable Magistrate not lawfully married to him to cognizable of the first believe, that she is lawfully class. married to him and to cohabit with him in that belief. 81(1) Marrying again during the life Imprisonment for 7 years and Ditto Bailable Ditto. time of a husband or wife. fine. 81(2) Same offence with concealment of Imprisonment for 10 years and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto. the former marriage from the person with whom subsequent marriage is contracted. 82 A person with fraudulent intention Imprisonment for 7 years and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto. going through the ceremony of being married, knowing that he is not thereby lawfully married. 83 Enticing or taking away or Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both. Ditto Ditto Any detaining with a criminal intent a Magistrate. married woman. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 84 Punishment for subjecting a Imprisonment for three years and fine. Cognizable if Non-bailable Magistrate married woman to cruelty. information relating of the first to the commission of class.] the offence is given to an officer in charge of a police station by the person aggrieved by the offence or by any person related to her by blood, marriage or adoption or if there is no such relative, by any public servant belonging to such class or category as may be notified by the State Government in this behalf. 85 Kidnapping, abducting or Imprisonment for 10 years and Ditto Ditto Court of inducing woman to compel her fine. Session. marriage, etc. 86 Causing miscarriage. Imprisonment for 3 years, or Non- Bailable Magistrate fine, or both. cognizable of the first class. If the woman be quick with child. Imprisonment for 7 years and Ditto Ditto Ditto. fine. 87 Causing miscarriage without Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session. women's consent for 10 years and fine. 88 Death caused by an act done Imprisonment for 10 years and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto. with intent to cause miscarriage. If act done without women’s Imprisonment for life, or as above. Ditto Ditto Ditto. consent. 89 Act done with intent to prevent a Imprisonment for 10 years, or fine, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. child being born alive, or to cause both. it to die after its birth. 90 Causing death of a quick unborn Imprisonment for 10 years and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto. child by an act amounting to culpable homicide. 91 Exposure of a child under 12 Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, or Ditto Bailable Magistrate of the first years of age by parent or person both. class. having care of it with intention of wholly abandoning it. 92 Concealment of birth by secret Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. disposal of dead body. both. 93 Hiring, employing or engaging a imprisonment of either description or According as According as Court by which child to commit an offence. fine provided for that offence as if the offence offence offence committed offence has been committed by such committed is committed is is triable. person himself cognizable or bailable or non- non- bailable. cognizable. 94 Procuration of child. Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 95 Kidnapping or abducting child Imprisonment for 7 years and fine Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the under ten years with intent to steal first class. from its person. 96 Selling child for purposes of Imprisonment for 10 years and Ditto Ditto Ditto. prostitution, etc. fine. 97 Buying child for purposes of Imprisonment for 14 years Ditto Ditto Ditto. prostitution, etc. and fine. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 101 Murder (1) Death, or imprisonment for life, and Cognizable Non- Court of fine. bailable Session. (2) death or with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years and shall also be liable to fine. 102 Murder by life-convict. death or with imprisonment for life, which Ditto Ditto Ditto. shall mean the remainder of that person’s natural life. 103 Culpable homicide not amounting imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of Ditto Ditto Ditto. to murder. either description for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death; or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years and with fine, if the act is done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death, but without any intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death. 104 Causing death by negligence. (1) Imprisonment for 7 years and Ditto Non- Magistrate fine. bailable of the first class. (2) Imprisonment for 10 years and fine . 105 Abetment of suicide of child or Death, or imprisonment for life, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. person with mental illness. imprisonment for 10 years and fine. 106 Abetment of suicide. Imprisonment for 10 years and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto. 107 Attempt to murder (1) , if he by that act caused death, he Ditto Ditto Ditto. would be guilty of murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if hurt is caused to any person by such act, the offender shall be liable either to imprisonment for life, or to such punishment as is hereinbefore mentioned. (2) any person offending under sub- section (1) is under sentence of imprisonment for life, he may, if hurt is caused, be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, which shall mean the remainder of that person’s natural life. 108 Attempt to commit culpable (1) three years, or with fine, or with Ditto Ditto Ditto. homicide both; and, if hurt is caused to any person by such act, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 1 2 3 4 5 6 If such act causes hurt to any (2) Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. person both. 109(2) For commission of Organised crime if such offence has resulted in the death of Cognizable Non- Court of or attempt for commission of any person, be punishable with death or bailable Session. Organised crime imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees ten lakhs in any other case, be punishable with Ditto Ditto Ditto imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees five lakhs 109(3) Whoever, conspires or organises the Ditto Ditto Ditto commission of an organised crime, or assists, facilitates or otherwise engages in any act preparatory to an organised crime, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees five lakhs 109(4) Any person who is a member of an Ditto Ditto Ditto organised crime syndicate shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees five lakhs 109(5) Whoever, intentionally harbours or conceals Ditto Ditto Ditto or attempts to harbour or conceal any person who has committed the offence of an organised crime or any member of an organised crime syndicate or believes that his act will encourage or assist the doing of such crime shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees five lakhs 109(6) Whoever, holds any property derived, or Ditto Ditto Ditto obtained from the commission of an organised crime or proceeds of any organised crime or which has been acquired through the organised crime syndicate funds shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees two lakhs 109(7) If any person on behalf of a member of an Ditto Ditto Ditto organised crime syndicate is, or at any time has been in possession of movable or immovable property which he cannot satisfactorily account for, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to imprisonment for ten years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees one lakh and such property shall also be liable for attachment and forfeiture (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 110 Petty Organised crime or imprisonment for a term which shall not be Non- bailable Any Magistrate organised crime in general. less than one year but which may extend to Cognizable seven years and shall also be liable to fine 111 Offence of terrorist act if such offence has resulted in the death of Cognizable Non- Court of any person, be punishable with death or bailable Session. imprisonment for life without the benefit of parole and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees ten lakhs in any other case, be punishable with Ditto Ditto Ditto imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees five lakhs conspires, organises or causes to be Ditto Ditto Ditto organised any organisation, association or a group of persons for terrorist acts, or assists, facilitates or otherwise conspires to engage in any act preparatory to any terrorist act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees five lakhs member of terrorist organisation, which is Ditto Ditto Ditto involved in terrorist act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees five lakhs intentionally harbours or conceals or Ditto Ditto Ditto attempts to harbour or conceal any person who has committed an offence of any terrorist act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees five lakhs holds any property directly or indirectly, Ditto Ditto Ditto derived or obtained from commission of terrorist act or proceeds of terrorism, or acquired through the terrorist fund, or possesses, provides, collects or uses property or funds or makes available property, funds or financial service or other related services, by any means, to be used, in full or in part to carry out or facilitate the commission of any terrorist act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than rupees five lakhs and such property shall also be liable for attachment and forfeiture 113(2) Voluntarily causing hurt. Imprisonment for 1 year or fine of 10,000 Non- Ditto Any rupees, or both. cognizable Magistrate. 115(2) Voluntarily causing grievous hurt. Imprisonment for 7 years and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 116 (1) Voluntarily causing hurt (1) imprisonment of either description for a Cognizable Ditto Ditto. by dangerous weapons or means. term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to twenty (2) Voluntarily causing thousand rupees, or with both. grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means. (2 ) not less than one year but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 117 Voluntarily causing hurt or (1) imprisonment of either description for a Ditto Ditto Ditto. grievous hurt to extort property, or term which may extend to ten years, and to constrain to an illegal to an act. shall also be liable to fine. (2) voluntarily causes grievous hurt for any purpose referred to in sub–section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 118(1) Voluntarily causing hurt to Imprisonment for 7 years and fine. Ditto Bailable Magistrate of the extort confession first class. or information, or to compel restoration of property, etc. 118(2) Voluntarily causing grievous Imprisonment for 10 years and fine. Ditto Non- Court of hurt to extort confession or bailable Session. information, or to compel restoration of property, etc. 119 Voluntarily causing hurt or (1) five years, or with fine, or with Cognizable 1[Non- Ditto. grievous hurt to deter public both. bailable] servant from his duty. (2) ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 120(1) Voluntarily causing hurt on grave Imprisonment for 1 month, or Non- Bailable Any and sudden provocation, not fine of 5000 rupees, or both. cognizable Magistrate. intending to hurt any other than the person who gave the provocation. 120(2) Causing grievous hurt on Imprisonment for 5 years, or Cognizable Ditto Magistrate of grave and sudden provocation, fine of 10,000 rupees, or both. the first class. not intending to hurt any other than the person who gave the provocation. 121 Causing hurt by means of poison, Imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Court of etc., with intent to commit an description for a term which Session. offence. may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 122(1) Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by Imprisonment for not less than Cognizable Non-bailable Court of use of acid, etc. 10 years but which may extend Session to imprisonment for life and fine to be paid to the victim. 122(2) Voluntarily throwing or attempting Imprisonment for 5 years but Cognizable Non-bailable Court of to throw acid. which may extend to 7 years and Session.] with fine. 123 Act endangering life or personal Imprisonment for 3 months, or Ditto Ditto Any safety of others. fine of 2500 rupees, or both. Magistrate. (a) where the hurt is caused, six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both. (b) where grievous hurt is caused, three years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both. 1 2 3 4 5 6 124(2) Wrongfully restraining any person. Simple imprisonment for Ditto Ditto Ditto. 1 month, or fine of 5000 rupees, or both. 125(2) Wrongfully confining any person. Imprisonment for 1 year, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. fine of 5,000 rupees, or both. 125(3) Wrongfully confining for three or Imprisonment for 3 years, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. more days. Fine of 10000 rupees, or both. 125(4) Wrongfully confining for 10 or more Imprisonment for 5 years and Ditto Ditto Ditto. days. fine of 10000 rupees. 125(5) Keeping any person in wrongful Imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Magistrate of confinement, knowing that a writ description for a term which the first class. has been issued for his liberation. may extend to two years in addition to any term of imprisonment to which he may be liable under any other section of this Chapter and shall also be liable to fine. 125(6) Wrongful confinement in secret. Three years in addition to any Ditto Ditto Ditto. other punishment to which he may be liable for such wrongful confinement and shall also be liable to fine. 125(7) Wrongful confinement for the Imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Any purpose of extorting property, or description for a term which Magistrate. constraining to an illegal act, etc. may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 125(8) Wrongful confinement for the Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. purpose of extorting confession or information, or of compelling restoration of property, etc. 129 Assault or criminal force otherwise Three months, or with fine Non- Ditto Ditto. than on grave provocation. which may extend to one cognizable thousand rupees, or with both. 130 Assault or criminal force to deter imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Ditto public servant from discharge of his description for a term which duty. may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both 131 Assault or criminal force with intent imprisonment of either Non- Bailable Ditto. to dishonor a person, otherwise than description for a term which cognizable on grave and sudden provocation. may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both 132 Assault or criminal force in attempt imprisonment of either Cognizable Ditto Ditto. to commit theft of property worn or description for a term which carried by a person. may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 133 Assault or use of criminal force Imprisonment for 1 year, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. in attempt wrongfully to confine a fine of 5,000 rupees, or both. person. 134 Assault or use of criminal force on Simple imprisonment for one Non- Ditto Ditto. grave and sudden provocation. cognizable month, or fine of 1000 rupees, or both. 135 Kidnapping Imprisonment for 7 years and Cognizable Ditto Magistrate of the fine. first class. 137(1) Kidnaping a child. Rigorous imprisonment which Cognizable Non-bailable Magistrate of the shall not be less than 10 years first class. but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. 137(2) Maiming a child for purposes of Imprisonment which shall not be Ditto Ditto Court of begging. less than 20 years which may Session. extend to remainder of life, and with fine. 138(1) Kidnapping or abducting in order to Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. murder. rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and fine. 1 2 3 4 5 6 138(2) Kidnapping for ransom, etc. Death, or imprisonment for Ditto Ditto Ditto.] life and fine. 138(3) Kidnapping or abducting with Imprisonment for 7 years Ditto Ditto Court of intent secretly and wrongfully to and fine. Session. confine a person. 138(4) Kidnapping or abducting in order to Imprisonment for 10 years Ditto Ditto Court of subject a person to grievous hurt, and fine. Session. slavery, etc. 139 Importation of a girl or boy from Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. foreign country. 140 Wrongfully concealing or keeping in Punishment for kidnapping or Ditto Ditto Court by confinement, kidnapped or abducted abduction. which the person. kidnapping or abduction is triable. 141 Trafficking of person. Imprisonment of not less than 7 years Cognizable Non- Court of but which may extend to 10 years and bailable Session. with fine. Trafficking of more than one person. Imprisonment of not less than Cognizable Non- Court of 10 years but which may extend to bailable Session. imprisonment for life and with fine. Trafficking of a child. Imprisonment of not less than Cognizable Non- Court of 10 years but which may extend to bailable Session. imprisonment for life and with fine. Trafficking of more than one child. Imprisonment of not less than Cognizable Non- Court of 14 years but which may extend to bailable Session. imprisonment for life and with fine. Person convicted of offence of Imprisonment for life which shall Cognizable Non- Court of trafficking of child on more than one mean the remainder of that person’s bailable Session. occasion. natural life and with fine. Public servant or a police officer Imprisonment for life which shall Cognizable Non- Court of involved in trafficking of child. mean the remainder of that person’s bailable Session. natural life and with fine. 142 Exploitation of a trafficked child. Imprisonment of not less than Cognizable Non- Court of 5 years but which may extend bailable Session. to 10 years and with fine. Exploitation of a trafficked person. Imprisonment of not less than Cognizable Non- Court of 3 years but which may extend bailable Session.] to 7 years and with fine. 143 Habitual dealing in slaves. Imprisonment for life, or Cognizable Non- Court of imprisonment for 10 bailable Session. years and fine. 144 Unlawful compulsory labour. Imprisonment for 1 year, or Ditto Bailable Any fine, or both. Magistrate. 145 Waging or attempting to wage war, or Death, or imprisonment for Cognizable. Non- Court of abetting the waging of war, against the life and fine. bailable. Session. Government of India. 146 Conspiring to commit certain offences Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. against the State. imprisonment for 10 years and fine. 147 Collecting arms, etc., with the Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. intention of waging war against the imprisonment for 10 years and Government of India. fine. 1 2 3 4 5 6 148 Concealing with intent to facilitate a Imprisonment for 10 years and Ditto Ditto Ditto. design to wage war. fine. 149 Assaulting President, Governor, etc., Imprisonment for 7 years and Ditto Ditto Ditto. with intent to compel or restrain the fine. exercise of any lawful power. 150 Acts endangering sovereignty unity Imprisonment for life and fine, Cognizable Non- Court of and integrity of India. or imprisonment for 7 years bailable Session. and fine, or fine. 151 Waging war against Government of Imprisonment for life and fine, Ditto Ditto Ditto. any foreign State at peace with the or imprisonment for 7 years Government of India. and fine, or fine. 152 Committing depredation on the Imprisonment for 7 years and Ditto Ditto. Ditto. territories of any power in alliance or fine, and forfeiture of certain at peace with the Government of property. India. 153 Receiving property taken by war or Ditto. Ditto Ditto Ditto. depredation mentioned in sections 153 and 154. 154 Public servant voluntarily allowing Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. prisoner of state or war to escape. imprisonment for 10 years and fine. 155 Public servant negligently suffering Simple imprisonment for Ditto Bailable Magistrate of the such prisoner to escape. 3 years and fine. first class. 156 Aiding escape of, rescuing or Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Non- Court of harbouring such prisoner. imprisonment for 10 years and bailable Session. fine. 157 Abetting mutiny, or attempting to Imprisonment for life, or Cognizable Non- Court of seduce a soldier, sailor or airman from imprisonment for 10 years bailable Session. his duty. and fine. 158 Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is Death, or imprisonment for Ditto Ditto Ditto. committed in consequence thereof. life, or imprisonment for 10 years and fine. 159 Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor Imprisonment for 3 years and Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the or airman on his superior officer, fine. first class. when in execution of his office. 160 Abetment of such assault, if the Imprisonment for 7 years and Ditto Ditto Ditto assault committed. fine. 161 Abetment of desertion of soldier, Imprisonment for 2 years, or Ditto Bailable Any sailor or airman. fine, or both. Magistrate. 162 Harbouring deserter. Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 163 Deserter concealed on board merchant Fine of 3000 rupees. Non- Ditto. Ditto. vessel through negligence of master. cognizable 164 Abetment of act of insubordination by Imprisonment for 2 years or fine, Cognizable Ditto. Ditto. soldier, sailor or airman. or both. 166 Wearing garb or carrying token used Imprisonment for 3 months, or fine Ditto. Ditto Ditto by soldier, sailor or airman. of 2000 rupees, or both. 171 Bribery. Imprisonment for 1 year or fine, or Non- Ditto Magistrate of both, or if treating only, fine only. cognizable the first class. 172 Undue influence at an election. Imprisonment for one year, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. fine, or both. Personation at an election Ditto Cognizable Ditto Ditto. 1 2 3 4 5 6 173 False statement in connection with an Fine Non- Ditto Ditto. election. cognizable 174 Illegal payments in connection with Fine of 10,000 rupees. Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. elections. 175 Failure to keep election accounts. Fine of 5,000 rupees. Ditto Ditto Ditto. 176 Counterfeiting, or performing any part imprisonment for life, or with Cognizable Non-bailable Court of of the process of counterfeiting, coin. imprisonment of either Session. description for a term which may extend to ten years and fine. 176 Counterfeiting currency- Imprisonment for life, or Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session. notes or bank-notes. imprisonment for 10 years and fine. 177 Using as genuine forged Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. or counterfeit currency-notes or bank- notes. 177 Using as genuine, forged or imprisonment for life, or with Ditto Ditto Court of counterfeit coin, Government stamp, imprisonment of either Session. currency-notes or bank notes. description for a term which may extend to ten years and fine. 177 Using as genuine, forged or imprisonment for life, or with Ditto Ditto Ditto. counterfeit coin, Government stamp, imprisonment of either currency-notes or bank notes. description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 178 Possession of forged or counterfeit imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Court of coin, Government stamp, currency- description for a term which Session. notes or bank-notes. may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 178 Possession of forged or counterfeit imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Court of coin, Government stamp, currency- description for a term which Session. notes or bank-notes. may extend to seven years or with fine, or with both. 178 Having possession of a counterfeit imprisonment of either Ditto Bailable Ditto. Government stamp. description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 178 Possession of forged or counterfeit Imprisonment for 7 years, or Ditto Bailable Ditto. currency-notes or bank-notes. fine, or both. 179 Making or possessing machinery, Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Non- Ditto. instrument or material for forging or imprisonment for 10 years and bailable counterfeiting currency-notes or fine. bank-notes. 179 Making or possessing instruments or imprisonment for life, or with Ditto Ditto Court of materials for forging or counterfeiting imprisonment of either Session. coin, Government stamp, currency description for a term which notes or bank-notes. may extend to ten years and fine. 179 Making, buying or selling instrument Imprisonment for 10 years and Cognizable Non- Magistrate of for the purpose of counterfeiting a fine. bailable the first Government stamp. class. 180 Making or using documents Fine of 300 rupees. Non- Bailable Any resembling currency-notes or bank- cognizable Magistrate. notes. On refusal to disclose the name and Fine of 600 rupees. Ditto Ditto Ditto. address of the printer. 1 2 3 4 5 6 181 Effacing any writing from a substance Imprisonment for 3 years, or Ditto Ditto Ditto bearing a Government stamp, fine, or both. removing from a document a stamp used for it, with intent to cause a loss to Government. 182 Using a Government stamp known to Imprisonment for 2 years, or Ditto Ditto Any have been before used. fine, or both. Magistrate. 183 Erasure of mark denoting that stamps Imprisonment for 3 years, or Ditto Ditto Magistrate of have been used. fine, or both. the first class. 184 Fictitious stamps Fine of 200 rupees Possession Ditto Ditto Any of any person for making any Magistrate. fictitious stamp may be seized and forfeited. 185 Person employed in a Mint causing imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Ditto. coin to be of a different weight or description for a term which composition from that fixed by law. may extend to seven years and fine. 186 Unlawfully taking from a Mint any Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. coining instrument. 187(2) Being member of an unlawful Imprisonment for Cognizable Bailable Any assembly. 6 months, or fine, or both. Magistrate. 187(3) Joining or continuing in an unlawful Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. assembly, knowing that it has been commanded to disperse. 187(4) Joining an unlawful assembly armed Imprisonment for 2 years, or Ditto Bailable Ditto with any deadly weapon. fine, or both. 187(5) Knowingly joining or continuing in Imprisonment for 6 Ditto Bailable Any any assembly of five or more months, or fine or both. Magistrate. persons after it has been commanded to disperse. 187(6) Hiring, engaging or employing The same as for a member of such Cognizable Ditto Ditto. persons to take part in an unlawful assembly, and for any offence assembly. committed by any member of such assembly. 187(7) Harbouring persons hired for an Imprisonment for 6 months, or Cognizable Ditto Ditto unlawful assembly. fine, or both. 187(8) Being hired to take part in an Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto unlawful assembly or riot. Or to go armed. Imprisonment for 2 years, or Ditto Ditto Ditto fine, or both. 188 Every member of unlawful The same as for the offence. According as According as The Court by assembly guilty of offence offence is offence is bailable which the committed in prosecution of cognizable or non- or non-bailable offence is triable. common object. cognizable 189(2) Rioting. Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 189(3) Rioting, armed with a deadly Imprisonment for 5 years, or fine, Ditto Ditto Magistrate of weapon. or both. the first class. 190 Wantonly giving provocation with Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, Ditto Ditto Any Magistrate. intent to cause riot, if rioting be or both. committed. If not committed. Imprisonment for 6 months, or Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the fine, or both. first class. 191(1) Owner or occupier of land not giving Fine of 1,000 rupees. Non-cognizable Bailable Any information of riot, etc. Magistrate. 191(2) Person for whose benefit or on Fine Ditto Ditto Ditto. whose behalf a riot takes place not using all lawful means to prevent it. 1 2 3 4 5 6 191(3) Agent of owner or occupier for Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto whose benefit a riot is committed not using all lawful means to prevent it. 192(2) Committing affray Imprisonment for one month, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. fine of 1000 rupees or both. 193 Assaulting or obstructing public Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, Ditto Ditto Magistrate of servant when suppressing riot, etc. or both. the first class. 194 Promoting enmity between different Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, Ditto Non-bailable Ditto groups on ground of religion, race, or both. place of birth, residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony. Promoting enmity between classes Imprisonment for 5 years, Ditto Ditto Ditto in place of worship, etc. and fine. 195 Imputations, assertions prejudicial Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, Ditto Ditto Magistrate of to national integration. or both. the first- class If committed in a place of public Imprisonment for 5 years and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto worship, etc. 196 Public servant disobeying a Simple imprisonment for 1 year, Non-cognizable Bailable Ditto. direction of the law with intent to or fine, or both. cause injury to any person. 197 Public servant disobeying direction Imprisonment for minimum 6 Cognizable Bailable Magistrate of under law months which may extend to 2 the first- class years and fine. 198 Non-treatment of victim by hospital Imprisonment for 1 year or fine or Non-cognizable Bailable Magistrate of both. the first- class 199 Public servant framing an incorrect Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, Cognizable Ditto. Ditto. document with intent to cause or both. injury. 200 Public servant unlawfully engaging Simple imprisonment for 1 year, Non-cognizable Ditto Ditto. in trade. or fine, or both. 201 Public servant unlawfully buying or Simple imprisonment for 2 years, Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. bidding for property. or fine, or both and confiscation of property, if purchased. 202 Personating a public servant. imprisonment of either description Cognizable Non-bailable Any for a term which shall not be less Magistrate. than six months but may extend to three years and with fine 203 Wearing garb or carrying token used Imprisonment for Ditto Bailable Ditto. by public servant with fraudulent 3 months, or fine of 5000 rupees, intent. or both. 204 Absconding to avoid service of Simple imprisonment for Non-cognizable Bailable Any summons or other proceeding. 1 month, or fine of 5000 rupees, Magistrate. or both. If summons or notice require Simple imprisonment for 6 Ditto Ditto Ditto. attendance in person, etc., in a Court months, or fine of 10,000 rupees, of Justice. or both 205 Preventing service of summons or Simple imprisonment for Ditto Ditto Ditto. other proceeding, or preventing 1 month, or fine of 5000 rupees, publication thereof. or both. If summons, etc., require attendance Simple imprisonment for 6 Ditto Ditto Ditto. in person, etc., in a Court of Justice. months, or fine of 10,000 rupees, or both 206 Non-attendance in obedience to an Simple imprisonment for Ditto Ditto Ditto. order from public servant. 1 month, or fine of 5000 rupees, or both. If the order requires personal Simple imprisonment for 6 Ditto Ditto Ditto. attendance, etc., in a Court of months, or fine of 10,000 rupees, Justice. or both. 1 2 3 4 5 6 207 Non-appearance in response to a Imprisonment for 3 years, or with Cognizable Non-bailable Magistrate of proclamation under section 82 of fine, or with both the first- class Act __ of 2023 In a case where declaration has been Imprisonment for 7 years and fine Ditto Ditto Ditto made under sub-section (4) of section 82 of this Code pronouncing a person as proclaimed offender 208 Omission to produce document to Simple imprisonment for 2[Non- 2[Bailable] The Court in public servant by person legally 1 month, or fine of 5000 rupees, cognizable] which the bound to produce it. or both. offence is committed, subject to the provisions of Chapter XXVI; or, if not committed, in a court, any Magistrate. If the document is required to be Simple imprisonment for 6 Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. produced in or delivered to a Court months, or fine of 10,000 rupees, of Justice. or both. 209 Omission to give notice or Simple imprisonment for Ditto. Ditto. Any information to public servant by 1 month, or fine of 5000 rupees, Magistrate. person legally bound to give it.. or both. If the notice or information required Simple imprisonment for 6 Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. respects the commission of an months, or fine of 10,000 rupees, offence, etc. or both. If the notice or information is Imprisonment for Ditto Ditto Ditto. required by an order passed under 6 months, or fine of 1,000 rupees, sub-section (1) of section 356 of this or both. Code. 210 (a) Furnishing false information. simple imprisonment for a term Ditto Ditto Ditto. which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both (b) If the information required Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, Ditto Ditto Ditto. respects the commission of an or both. offence, etc. 211 Refusing oath when duly required to Simple imprisonment for Non-cognizable Bailable The Court in take oath by a public servant. 6 months, or fine of 5,000 rupees, which the or both. offence is committed, subject to the provisions of Chapter XXVI; or, if not committed in a Court, any Magistrate. 212 Refusing to answer public servant Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. authorised to question 213 Refusing to sign a statement made to imprisonment for a term which Ditto Ditto Ditto. a public servant when legally may extend to three months, or required to do so. with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees, or with both. 214 Knowingly stating to a public Imprisonment for 3 years and fine. Ditto Ditto Magistrate of servant on oath as true that which is the first class. false. 215 Giving false information to a public imprisonment of either description Ditto Ditto Any servant in order to cause him to use for a term which may extend to Magistrate. his lawful power to the injury or one year, or with fine which may annoyance of any person. extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both 1 2 3 4 5 6 216 Resistance to the taking of property imprisonment of either description Ditto Ditto Ditto. by the lawful authority of a public for a term which may extend to six servant. months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both. 217 Obstructing sale of property offered Imprisonment for 1 month, or fine Ditto Ditto Ditto. for sale by authority of a public of 5000 rupees, or both. servant. 218 Illegal purchase or bid for property Imprisonment for 1 month, or fine Ditto Ditto Ditto. offered for sale by authority of of 200 rupees, or both. public servant. 219 Obstructing public servant in Imprisonment for 3 months, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. discharge of his public functions. fine of 2000 rupees, or both. 220 (a) Omission to assist public servant Simple imprisonment for 1 month, Ditto Ditto Ditto. when bound by law to give such or fine of 2500 rupees, or both. assistance. (b) Wilfully neglecting to aid a Simple imprisonment for 6 Ditto Ditto Ditto. public servant who demands aid in months, or fine of 5000 rupees, or the execution of process, the both. prevention of offences, etc. 221 (a) Disobedience to an order Simple imprisonment for 6 month, Cognizable Ditto Ditto. lawfully promulgated by a public or fine of 2000 rupees, or both. servant, if such disobedience causes obstruction, annoyance or injury to persons lawfully employed. (b) If such disobedience causes Imprisonment for 1 Year, or fine Ditto Ditto Ditto. danger to human life, health or of 5,000 rupees, or both. safety, or causes or tends to cause a riot or affray. 222 Threat of injury to public servant. Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, Non- cognizable Ditto Ditto. or both. 223 Threat of injury to induce person to Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, Ditto Ditto Ditto. refrain from applying for protection or both. to public servant. 224 Attempt to commit suicide to imprisonment for a term which Ditto Ditto Ditto. compel or restraint exercise of may extend to one year or with lawful power. fine or with both or with community service. 227 (1) Giving or fabricating false Imprisonment for 7 years and Non-cognizable Bailable Magistrate of evidence in a judicial proceeding. 10000 rupees. the first class. (2) Giving or fabricating false Imprisonment for 3 years and Ditto Ditto Any evidence in any other case. 5000 rupees. Magistrate. 228 (1) Giving or fabricating false Imprisonment for life, or rigorous Ditto Non- bailable Court of evidence with intent to cause any imprisonment for 10 years and session. person to be convicted of capital 50000 rupees. offence. (2) If innocent person be thereby Death, or as above. Ditto Ditto Ditto. convicted and executed. 229 Giving or fabricating false evidence The same as for the offence. Ditto Ditto Ditto. with intent to procure conviction of an offence punishable with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment for 7 years, or upwards. 230 (1) Threatening any person to give Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, Cognizable Ditto Court by false evidence. or both. which offence of giving false evidence is triable. 1 2 3 4 5 6 (2) If innocent person is convicted The same as for the offence. Ditto Ditto Ditto. and sentenced in consequence of false evidence with death, or imprisonment for more than seven years. 231 Using in a judicial proceeding The same as for giving or 2[Non-cognizable] According as Court by evidence known to be false or fabricating false evidence. offence of which offence fabricated. giving such of giving or evidence is fabricating bailable or false evidence non- is triable. bailable. 232 Knowingly issuing or signing a false Ditto Ditto Bailable Court by certificate relating to any fact of which offence which such certificate is by law of giving false admissible in evidence. evidence is triable. 233 Using as a true certificate one known Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. to be false in a material point. 234 False statement made in any Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. declaration which is by law receivable as evidence. 235 Using as true any such declaration Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. known to be false. 236 Causing disappearance of evidence Imprisonment for 7 years and fine. According as the Ditto Court of of an offence committed, or giving offence in relation Session. false information touching it to to which screen the offender, if a capital disappearance of offence. evidence is caused is cognizable or non- cognizable. If punishable with imprisonment for Imprisonment for 3 years and fine. Non-cognizable Ditto Magistrate of life or imprisonment for 10 years. the first class. If punishable with less than 10 Imprisonment for a quarter of the Ditto Ditto Court by which years’ imprisonment. longest term provided for the the offence is offence, or fine, or both. triable. 237 Intentional omission to give imprisonment of either description Ditto Ditto Any information of an offence by a for a term which may extend to six Magistrate. person legally bound to inform. months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both. 238 Giving false information respecting Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, Ditto Ditto Ditto. an offence committed. or both. 239 Secreting or destroying any Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine Non-cognizable Bailable Magistrate of document to prevent its production of 5000 rupees, or both. the first class. as evidence. 240 False personation for the purpose Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, Ditto Ditto Ditto. of any act or proceeding in a suit or or both. criminal prosecution, or for becoming bail or security. 241 Fraudulent removal or concealment, Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, Ditto Ditto Any Magistrate. etc., of property to prevent its or both. seizure as a forfeiture or in satisfaction of a fine under sentence, or in execution of a decree. 242 Claiming property without right, or Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, Ditto Ditto Ditto. practicing deception touching any or both. right to it, to prevent its being taken as a forfeiture, or in satisfaction of a fine under sentence, or in execution of a decree. 1 2 3 4 5 6 243 Fraudulently suffering a decree to imprisonment of either description Ditto Ditto Magistrate of pass for a sum not due, or suffering for a term which may extend to the first class. decree to be executed after it has two years, or with fine, or with been satisfied. both. 244 False claim in a Court of Justice. Imprisonment for 2 years and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto. 245 Fraudulently obtaining a decree for Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, Ditto Ditto Ditto. a sum not due, or causing a decree to or both. be executed after it has been satisfied. 246 False charge of offence made with imprisonment of either description Ditto Ditto Ditto. intent to injure,— for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees, or with both. criminal proceeding instituted on a imprisonment of either description Ditto Ditto Ditto. false charge of an offence for a term which may extend to punishable with death, ten years, and shall also be liable imprisonment for life, or to fine. imprisonment for ten years or upwards. 247 Harbouring an offender, if the Imprisonment for 5 years and fine. Cognizable Ditto Magistrate of offence be capital. the first class. If punishable with imprisonment for Imprisonment for 3 years and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto. life or with imprisonment for 10 years. If punishable with imprisonment for Imprisonment for a quarter of the Ditto Ditto Ditto. 1 year and not for 10 years. longest term, and of the descriptions, provided for the offence, or fine, or both. 248 Taking gift, etc., to screen an Imprisonment for 7 years and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto. offender from punishment if the offence be capital. If punishable with imprisonment for Imprisonment for 3 years and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto. life or with imprisonment for 10 years. If punishable with imprisonment for Imprisonment for a quarter of the Ditto Ditto Ditto. less than 10 years. longest term provided for the offence, or fine, or both. 249 Offering gift or restoration of Imprisonment for 7 years and fine. Non-cognizable Ditto Ditto. property in consideration of screening offender if the offence be capital. If punishable with imprisonment for Imprisonment for 3 years and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto. life or with imprisonment for 10 years. If punishable with imprisonment for Imprisonment for a quarter of the Ditto Ditto Ditto. less than 10 years. longest term, provided for the offence, or fine, or both. 250 Taking gift to help to recover Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, Cognizable Ditto Ditto. movable property of which a person or both. has been deprived by an offence without causing apprehension of offender. 251 Harbouring an offender who has Imprisonment for 7 years and fine. Cognizable Bailable Magistrate of escaped from custody, or whose the first class. apprehension has been ordered, if the offence be capital. If punishable with imprisonment for Imprisonment for 3 years, with or Ditto Ditto Ditto. life or with imprisonment for without fine. 10 years. 1 2 3 4 5 6 If punishable with imprisonment for Imprisonment for a quarter of the Ditto Ditto Ditto. 1 year and not for 10 years. longest term provided for the offence, or fine, or both. 252 Harbouring robbers or dacoits. Rigorous imprisonment for Ditto Ditto Ditto. 7 years and fine. 253 Public servant disobeying a Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, Non-cognizable Ditto Any Magistrate. direction of law with intent to save or both. person from punishment, or property from forfeiture. 254 Public servant framing an incorrect Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, Cognizable Ditto Magistrate of record or writing with intent to save or both. the first class. person from punishment, or property from forfeiture. 255 Public servant in a judicial Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, Non- cognizable Ditto Ditto. proceeding corruptly making and or both. pronouncing an order, report, verdict, or decision which he knows to be contrary to law. 256 Commitment for trial or Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. confinement by a person having authority, who knows that he is acting contrary to law. 257 Intentional omission to apprehend Imprisonment for 7 years, with or According as the Ditto Ditto. on the part of a public servant bound without fine. offence in relation by law to apprehend an offender, if to which such the offence be capital. omission has been made is cognizable or non- cognizable. If punishable with imprisonment for Imprisonment for 3 years, with or Cognizable Ditto Ditto. life or imprisonment for 10 years. without fine. If punishable with imprisonment for Imprisonment for 2 years, with or Ditto Ditto Ditto. less than 10 years. without fine. 258 Intentional omission to apprehend Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Non- bailable Court of on the part of a public servant bound imprisonment for 14 years, with or Session. by law to apprehend person under without fine. sentence of a Court of Justice if under sentence of death. If under sentence of imprisonment Imprisonment for 7 years, with or Ditto Ditto Magistrate of for life or imprisonment for without fine. the first class. 10 years, or upwards. If under sentence of imprisonment Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, Ditto Bailable Ditto. for less than 10 years or lawfully or both. committed to custody. 259 Escape from confinement Simple imprisonment for 2 years, Non-cognizable Ditto Any Magistrate. negligently suffered by a public or fine, or both. servant. 260 Resistance or obstruction by a Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, Cognizable Ditto Ditto. person to his lawful apprehension. or both. 261 Resistance or obstruction to the Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. lawful apprehension of any person, or rescuing him from lawful custody. If charged with an offence Imprisonment for 3 years and fine. Ditto Non- bailable Magistrate of punishable with imprisonment for the first class. life or imprisonment for 10 years. If charged with a capital offence. Imprisonment for 7 years and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto. If the person is sentenced to Imprisonment for 7 years Cognizable Non- Magistrate of imprisonment for life, or and fine. bailable the first class. imprisonment for 10 years, or upwards. If under sentence of death Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Ditto Court of imprisonment for 10 years Session. and fine. 1 2 3 4 5 6 262 Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of escape on part of public servant, in cases not otherwise provided for:– (a) in case of intentional omission Imprisonment for 3 years, Non-cognizable Bailable Magistrate of or sufferance; or fine, or both. the first class. (b) in case of negligent omission or Simple imprisonment for 2 Ditto Ditto Any sufferance. years, or fine, or both. Magistrate. 263 Resistance or obstruction to lawful Imprisonment for 6 Cognizable Ditto Ditto. apprehension, or escape or rescue in months, or fine, or both. cases not otherwise provided for. 264 Violation of condition of remission of Punishment of original sentence, Ditto Non- The Court by punishment or if part of the punishment has bailable which the been undergone, the residue. original offence was triable. 265 Intentional insult or interruption to a Simple imprisonment for 6 Non-cognizable Bailable The Court in public servant sitting in any stage of months, or fine of 5,000 rupees, which the offence a judicial proceeding. or both. is committed subject to the provisions of Chapter XXIX. 266 Personation of an assessor. Imprisonment for 2 years, Non-cognizable Ditto Magistrate of the or fine, or both. first class. 267 Failure by person released on bail or Imprisonment for 1 year, or Cognizable Non- Any Magistrate. bond to appear in Court fine, or both bailable 269 Negligently doing any act known to Imprisonment for 6 months, or Cognizable Bailable Any Magistrate. be likely to spread infection of any fine, or both. disease dangerous to life. 270 Malignantly doing any act known to Imprisonment for 2 years, or Ditto Ditto Ditto be likely to spread infection of any fine, or both. disease dangerous to life. 271 Knowingly disobeying any quarantine Imprisonment for 6 months, or Non-cognizable Ditto Ditto rule. fine, or both. 272 Adulterating food or drink intended Imprisonment for 6 months, or Ditto Ditto Ditto for sale, so as to make the same fine of 5,000 rupees, or both. noxious. 273 Selling any food or drink as food and imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Ditto drink, knowing the same to be description for a term which noxious. may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both 274 Adulterating any drug or medical imprisonment of either Ditto Non- Ditto preparation intended for sale so as to description for a term which bailable lessen its efficacy, or to change its may extend to one year, or with operation, or to make it noxious. fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both 275 Sale of adulterated drugs. imprisonment of either Ditto Bailable Ditto description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both 1 2 3 4 5 6 276 Sale of drug as a different drug or imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Ditto preparation. description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both. 277 Fouling water of public spring or Imprisonment for 6 months, or Cognizable Bailable Any Magistrate. reservoir. fine of 5000 rupees, or both. 278 Making atmosphere noxious to health. Fine of 1000 rupees Non-cognizable Ditto Ditto 279 Rash driving or riding on a public Imprisonment for 6 months, or Cognizable Ditto Ditto way. fine of 1,000 rupees, or both. 280 Rash navigation of vessel. Imprisonment for 6 months, or Ditto Ditto Ditto fine of 10,000 rupees, or both. 281 Exhibition of a false light, mark or imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the buoy. description for a term which first class. may extend to seven years, and with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees. 282 Conveying person by water for hire in Imprisonment for 6 months, or Ditto Ditto Any Magistrate. unsafe or overloaded vessel. fine of 5,000 rupees, or both. 283 Danger or obstruction in public way Fine of 5000 rupees. Ditto Ditto Ditto or line of navigation. 284 Negligent conduct with respect to Imprisonment for 6 months, or Ditto Ditto Ditto poisonous substance. fine of 5,000 rupees, or both. 285 Negligent conduct with respect to fire Imprisonment for 6 months, or Ditto Ditto Ditto or combustible matter. fine of 2,000 rupees, or both. 286 Negligent conduct with respect to Imprisonment for 6 months, or Ditto Ditto Ditto explosive substance. fine of 5,000 rupees, or both. 287 Negligent conduct with respect to Ditto Non-cognizable Ditto Ditto machinery. 288 Negligent conduct with respect to Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto pulling down, repairing or constructing buildings etc. 289 Negligent conduct with respect to Ditto Cognizable Ditto Ditto animal. 290 Punishment for public nuisance in Fine of 1000 rupees Non-cognizable Ditto Ditto cases not otherwise provided for. 291 Continuance of nuisance after simple imprisonment for a term Cognizable Ditto Ditto injunction to discontinue. which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both. 292 Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc. On first conviction, with Ditto Ditto Ditto imprisonment for 2 years, and with fine of 5,000 rupees, and, in the event of second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment for five years, and with fine of 10,000 rupees. 293 Sale, etc., of obscene objects to child. On first conviction, with Ditto Ditto Ditto imprisonment for 3 years, and with fine of 2,000 rupees, and in the event of second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment for 7 years, and with fine of 5,000 rupees. 1 2 3 4 5 6 294 Obscene acts and songs imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Ditto. description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 295 (1) Keeping a lottery office Imprisonment for 6 months, or Non-cognizable Ditto Ditto. fine or both. (2) Publishing proposals relating to fine which may extend to five Ditto Ditto Ditto. lotteries. thousand rupees. 296 Injuring or defiling place of worship, Imprisonment for 2 years, or Cognizable Non- Any Magistrate. with intent to insult the religion of any fine or both. Bailable class. 297 Deliberate and malicious acts, intended Imprisonment for 3 years, or Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the to outrage religious feelings of any fine, or both. first class. class by insulting its religion or religious beliefs 298 Disturbing religious assembly. Imprisonment for 1 year, or Ditto Bailable Any Magistrate. fine, or both. 299 Trespassing on burial places, etc. Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 300 Uttering words, etc., with deliberate Ditto Non-cognizable Ditto Ditto. intent to wound religious feelings. 301 Theft Rigorous imprisonment for a Cognizable Non- Any Magistrate. term which shall not be less bailable than one year but which may extend to five years and with fine. In cases of theft where the value of the stolen property is less than five thousand rupees, and a person is convicted for the first time, shall upon return of the value of property or restoration of the stolen property, shall be punished with community service. 302 Snatching. imprisonment of either Non-cognizable Bailable Ditto. description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine 303 Theft in a dwelling house, or means of Imprisonment for 7 years and Ditto Ditto Ditto. transportation or place of worship, etc. fine. 304 Theft by clerk or servant of property in Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. possession of master or employer. 305 Theft after preparation made for Rigorous imprisonment for 10 Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the causing death, hurt or restraint in order years and fine. first class. to the committing of theft. 306(2) Extortion Imprisonment for 7 Ditto Ditto Any years, or fine, or both. Magistrate. 306(3) Putting or attempting to put in fear of Imprisonment for 2 Ditto Bailable Ditto. injury, in order to commit extortion. years, or fine, or both. 306(4) Putting or attempting to put a person in Imprisonment for 7 years and Ditto Ditto Ditto. fear of death or grievous hurt in order fine. to commit extortion. 306(5) Extortion by putting a person in fear of Imprisonment for 10 years and Ditto Non- Magistrate of the death or grievous hurt. fine. bailable first class. 1 2 3 4 5 6 306(6) Putting a person in fear of accusation of Imprisonment for 10 years and Ditto Ditto Ditto. an offence punishable with death, fine. imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years in order to commit extortion. 306(7) Extortion by threat of accusation of an Imprisonment for 10 years and Ditto Bailable Ditto. offence punishable with death, fine. imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for 10 years. If the offence threatened be an Imprisonment for life Ditto Ditto Ditto. unnatural offence. If the offence be an unnatural offence. Imprisonment for life. Ditto Ditto Ditto. 307 Robbery (2) Rigorous imprisonment for Ditto Non- Ditto. 10 years and fine. bailable (3) Rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and fine. (4) Imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and fine. 308(2) Dacoity imprisonment for a term which Ditto Ditto Court of may extend to ten years, and Session. shall also be liable to fine. 308(3) Murder in dacoity Death, imprisonment for life, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and fine. 308(4) Making preparation to commit dacoity. Rigorous imprisonment for 10 Cognizable Non- Court of years and fine. bailable Session. 308(5) Being one of five or more persons Ditto Ditto Ditto Court of assembled for the purpose of Session. committing dacoity. 308(6) Belonging to a gang of persons Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. associated for the purpose of habitually rigorous imprisonment for 10 committing dacoity. years and fine. 309 Robbery or dacoity, with attempt to Rigorous imprisonment for not Ditto Ditto Ditto. cause death or grievous hurt. less than 7 years. 310 Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. when armed with deadly weapon. 311 Belonging to a wandering gang of Rigorous imprisonment for 7 Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the persons associated for the purpose of years and fine. first class. habitually committing thefts. 312 Dishonest misappropriation of movable Not be less than six months but Non-cognizable Bailable Any Magistrate. property, or converting it to one’s own which may extend to two years use. and with fine. 313 Dishonest misappropriation of property Imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the possessed by deceased person at the description for a term which first class. time of his death. may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine, and if the offender at the time of such person's decease was employed by him as a clerk or servant, the imprisonment may extend to seven years. 1 2 3 4 5 6 314(2) Criminal breach of trust Imprisonment for 5 years, or Cognizable Non- Ditto. fine, or both. bailable 314(3) Criminal breach of trust by a carrier, Imprisonment for 7 years and Ditto Ditto Ditto. wharfinger, etc. fine. 314(4) Criminal breach of trust by a clerk or Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto servant. 314(5) Criminal breach of trust by public Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. servant or by banker, merchant or imprisonment for 10 years and agent, etc. fine. 315(2) Dishonestly receiving stolen property Imprisonment for 3 years, or Ditto Ditto Any Magistrate. knowing it to be stolen. fine, or both. 315(3) Dishonestly receiving stolen property, Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Ditto Court of knowing that it was obtained by rigorous imprisonment for 10 Session. dacoity. years and fine. 315(4) Habitually dealing in stolen property. Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. imprisonment for 10 years and fine. 315(5) Assisting in concealment or disposal Imprisonment for 3 years, or Ditto Ditto Any Magistrate. of stolen property, knowing it to be fine, or both. stolen. 316(2) Cheating Imprisonment for 3 years, or Non-cognizable Bailable Ditto. fine, or both. 316(3) Cheating a person whose interest the Imprisonment for 5 years, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. offender was bound, either by law or fine, or both. by legal contract, to protect. 317 Cheating by personation. imprisonment of either Cognizable Ditto Ditto. description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. 318 Fraudulent removal or concealment of Imprisonment of either Non-cognizable Bailable Any Magistrate. property, etc., to prevent distribution description for a term which among creditors. shall not be less than six months but which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 319 Fraudulently preventing from being Imprisonment for 2 years, or Non-cognizable Bailable Any Magistrate. made available for his creditors a debt fine, or both. or demand due to the offender. 320 Fraudulent execution of deed of imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Ditto. transfer containing a false statement description for a term which of consideration. may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both 321 Fraudulent removal or concealment of imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Ditto. property, of himself or any other description for a term which person or assisting in the doing may extend to three years, or thereof, or dishonestly releasing any with fine, or with both demand or claim to which he is entitled. 322 Mischief (2) Imprisonment for 6 months Ditto Ditto Ditto. or fine, or both. (3) Imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Ditto. description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both; 1 2 3 4 5 6 (4) imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Ditto. description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. (5) imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Ditto. description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. (6) imprisonment of either Ditto Ditto Ditto. description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine. 323 Mischief by killing or maiming imprisonment of either Cognizable Ditto Ditto. animal description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both 324(a) Mischief by causing diminution of Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. supply of water for agricultural purposes, etc. 324(b) Mischief by injury to public road, Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. bridge, navigable river, or navigable channel, and rendering it impassable or less safe for travelling or conveying property. 324(c) Mischief by causing inundation or Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. obstruction to public drainage attended with damage. 324(d) Mischief by destroying or moving or Imprisonment for 7 years, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. rendering less useful a lighthouse or fine, or both. seamark, or by exhibiting false lights. 324(e) Mischief by destroying or moving, Imprisonment for 1 year, or Non-cognizable Ditto Any Magistrate. etc., a landmark fixed by public fine, or both. authority. 324(f) Mischief by fire or explosive Imprisonment for 7 years and Cognizable Ditto Magistrate of the substance with intent to cause damage fine. first class. to an amount of 100 rupees or upwards, or, in case of agricultural produce, 10 rupees or upwards. 324(g) Mischief by fire or explosive Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Non- Court of substance with intent to destroy a imprisonment for 10 years and bailable Session. house, etc. fine. 325(1) Mischief with intent to destroy or Imprisonment for 10 years and Ditto Ditto Ditto. make unsafe a decked vessel or a fine. vessel of 20 tonnes burden. 325(2) The mischief described in the last Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. section when committed by fire or imprisonment for 10 years and any explosive substance. fine. 326 Running vessel ashore with intent to Imprisonment for 10 years and Ditto Ditto Ditto. commit theft, etc. fine. 327(3) Criminal trespass Imprisonment for 3 months, or Ditto Ditto Any Magistrate. fine of 5000 rupees, or both. 327(4) House-trespass Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine Ditto Ditto Ditto. of 5,000 rupees, or both. 329(1) Lurking house-trespass or house- Imprisonment for 2 years Ditto Ditto Ditto. breaking. and fine. 1 2 3 4 5 6 329(2) Lurking house-trespass or house- Imprisonment for 3 years and Ditto Ditto Any breaking by night. fine. Magistrate. 329(3) Lurking house-trespass or house- Imprisonment for 3 years and Ditto Ditto Ditto. breaking in order to the commission fine. of an offence punishable with imprisonment. If the offence be theft Imprisonment for 10 years Ditto Ditto Magistrate of and fine. the first class. 329(4) Lurking house-trespass or house- Imprisonment for 5 years and Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the breaking by night in order to the fine. first class. commission of an offence punishable with imprisonment. If the offence is theft Imprisonment for 14 years Ditto Ditto Ditto. and fine. 329(5) Lurking house-trespass or house- Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. breaking after preparation made for causing hurt, assault, etc. 329(6) Lurking house-trespass or house- Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. breaking by night, after preparation made for causing hurt, etc. 329(7) Grievous hurt caused whilst Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Ditto Court of committing lurking house-trespass or imprisonment for 10 years Session. house-breaking. and fine. 329(8) Death or grievous hurt caused by one Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. of several persons jointly concerned in house-breaking by night, etc. 330(a) House-trespass in order to the Imprisonment for life, or Cognizable Non- Court of commission of an offence punishable rigorous imprisonment for bailable Session. with death. 10 years and fine. 330(b) House-trespass in order to the Imprisonment for 10 years and Ditto Ditto Ditto. commission of an offence punishable fine. with imprisonment for life. 330(c) House-trespass in order to the Imprisonment for 2 years Ditto Bailable Any commission of an offence punishable and fine. Magistrate. with imprisonment. If the offence is theft Imprisonment for 7 years Ditto Non- Ditto. bailable and fine. 331 House-trespass, having made Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. preparation for causing hurt, assault, etc. 332(1) Dishonestly breaking open or Imprisonment for 2 years or Ditto Ditto Any Magistrate. unfastening any closed receptacle fine, or both. containing or supposed to contain property. 332(2) Being entrusted with any closed Imprisonment for 3 years or Ditto Bailable Ditto receptacle containing or supposed to fine, or both. contain any property, and fraudulently opening the same. 334(2) Forgery Imprisonment for 2 years, or Non-cognizable Bailable Magistrate of fine, or both. the first class. 1 2 3 4 5 6 334(3) Forgery for the purpose of cheating. Imprisonment for 7 years and Cognizable Non- Magistrate of the fine. bailable first class. 334(4) Forgery for the purpose of harming Imprisonment for 3 years and Ditto Bailable Ditto. the reputation of any person or fine. knowing that it is likely to be used for that purpose. 335 Forgery of a record of a Court of Imprisonment for 7 years and Ditto Non- Ditto. Justice or of a Registrar of Births, etc., fine bailable kept by a public servant. 336 Forgery of a valuable security, will, or Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. authority to make or transfer any imprisonment for 10 years and valuable security, or to receive any fine money, etc. When the valuable security is a Ditto Cognizable Ditto Ditto. promissory note of the central government 337 Having possession of a document, Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. knowing it to be forged, with intent to use it as genuine; if the document is one of the description mentioned in section 335 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita. If the document is one of the Imprisonment for life, or Non-cognizable Ditto Ditto. description mentioned in section 336 imprisonment for 7 years and of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita. fine. 338(2) Using as genuine a forged document Punishment for forgery of such Ditto Ditto Ditto. which is known to be forged. document. When the forged document is a Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. promissory note of the Central Government. 339(1) Making or counterfeiting a seal, plate, Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. etc., with intent to commit a forgery imprisonment for 7 years and punishable under section 336 of the fine. Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, or possessing with like intent any such seal, plate, etc., knowing the same to be counterfeit. 339(2) Making or counterfeiting a seal, plate, Imprisonment for 7 years and Ditto Ditto Ditto. etc., with intent to commit a forgery fine. punishable otherwise than under section 336 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, or possessing with like intent any such seal, plate, etc., knowing the same to be counterfeit. 340(1) Counterfeiting a device or mark used Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. for authenticating documents described in section 467 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, or possessing counterfeit marked material. 340(2) Counterfeiting a device or mark used Imprisonment for 7 years and Ditto Non- Ditto. for authenticating documents other fine. bailable than those described in section 467 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, or possessing counterfeit marked material. 341 Fraudulently destroying or defacing, Imprisonment for life, or Ditto Ditto. Ditto. or attempting to destroy or deface, or imprisonment for 7 years and secreting, a will, etc. fine. 342 Falsification of accounts. Imprisonment for 7 years or Ditto Bailable Ditto. fine, or both. 1 2 3 4 5 6 343(3) Using a false property mark with intent Imprisonment for 1 year, or Ditto Ditto Any Magistrate. to deceive or injure any person. fine, or both. 344 Removing, destroying or defacing Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, Ditto Ditto Ditto. property mark with intent to cause or both. injury. 345(1) Counterfeiting a property mark used by Imprisonment for 2 years, or Ditto Ditto Ditto. another, with intent to cause damage or fine, or both. injury. 345(2) Counterfeiting a property mark used by Imprisonment for 3 years and Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the a public servant, or any mark used by fine. first class. him to denote the manufacture, quality, etc., of any property. 346 Fraudulently making or having Imprisonment for 3 years, or Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. possession of any die, plate or other fine, or both. instrument for counterfeiting any public or private property mark. 347 Knowingly selling goods marked with Imprisonment for 1 year, or Non-cognizable Bailable Any Magistrate. a counterfeit property mark. fine, or both. 348(1) Fraudulently making a false mark upon Imprisonment for 3 years or, Ditto Ditto Ditto. any package or receptacle containing fine, or both. goods, with intent to cause it to be believed that it contains goods, which it does not contain, etc. 348(2) Making use of any such false mark. Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 349(2) Criminal intimidation. Imprisonment for 2 years, or Non-cognizable Bailable Ditto. fine, or both. 349(3) If threat be to cause death or grievous Imprisonment for 7 years, or Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the hurt, etc. fine, or both. first class. 349(4) Criminal intimidation by anonymous Imprisonment for 2 years, in Ditto Ditto Ditto. communication or having taken addition to the punishment precaution to conceal whence the threat under above section. comes. 350 Insult intended to provoke breach of Imprisonment for 2 years, or Non-cognizable Bailable Any Magistrate. the peace. fine, or both. 351 False statement, rumour, etc., Imprisonment for 3 years, or Ditto Non- Ditto. circulated with intent to cause mutiny fine, or both. bailable or offence against the public peace. False statement, rumour, etc., with Ditto Cognizable Ditto Ditto. intent to create enmity, hatred or ill- will between different classes. False statement, rumour, etc., made in Imprisonment for 5 years and Ditto Ditto Ditto. place of worship, etc., with intent to fine. create enmity, hatred or ill-will. 352 Act caused by inducing a person to Imprisonment for 1 year, or Ditto Ditto Any Magistrate. believe that he will be rendered an fine, or both. object of Divine displeasure. 353 Appearing in a public place, etc., in a Simple imprisonment for 24 Non-cognizable Ditto Ditto. state of intoxication, and causing hours, or fine of 1000 rupees, or annoyance to any person. both or with community service. 354(2) Defamation against the President or the Simple imprisonment for 2 Non-cognizable Bailable Court of Vice-President or the Governor of a years, or community service or Session. State or Administrator of a Union fine, or both territory or a Minister in respect of his conduct in the discharge of his public functions when instituted upon a complaint made by the Public Prosecutor. Defamation in any other case Ditto Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the first class. 1 2 3 4 5 6 354(3) Printing or engraving matter knowing Simple imprisonment for 2 Ditto Ditto Court of it to be defamatory against the years, or fine, or both Session. President or the Vice-President or the Governor of a State or Administrator of a Union territory or a Minister in respect of his conduct in the discharge of his public functions when instituted upon a complaint made by the Public Prosecutor. Printing or engraving matter knowing Ditto Ditto Ditto Magistrate of it to be defamatory, in any other case. the first class. 354(4) Sale of printed or engraved substance Ditto Ditto Ditto Court of containing defamatory matter, Session. knowing it to contain such matter against the President or the Vice- President or the Governor of a State or Administrator of a Union territory or a Minister in respect of his conduct in the discharge of his public functions when instituted upon a complaint made by the Public Prosecutor. Sale of printed or engraved substance Ditto Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the containing defamatory matter, first class. knowing it to contain such matter in any other case. 355 Being bound to attend on or supply Imprisonment for 3 months, or Non-cognizable Bailable Any Magistrate. the wants of a person who is helpless fine of 5000 rupees, or both. from youth, unsoundness of mind or disease, and voluntarily omitting to do so. I. —CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES AGAINST OTHER LAWS Offence Cognizable Bailable or By what court or non- non- bailable triable cognizable If punishable with death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for more than 7 years Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session. If punishable with imprisonment for 3 years and upwards but not more than 7 years Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the first class. If punishable with imprisonment for less than 3 years or with fine only. Non- Bailable Any Magistrate. cognizable THE SECOND SCHEDULE (See section 524) FORM No. 1 SUMMONS TO AN ACCUSED PERSON (See section 63) To (name of accused) of (address) WHEREAS your attendance is necessary to answer to a charge of (state shortly the offence charged), you are hereby required to appear in person (or by pleader, as the case may be) before the (Magistrate) of , on the day . Herein fail not. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 2 WARRANT OF ARREST (See section 72) To (name and designation of the person or persons who is or are to execute the warrant). WHEREAS (name of accused) of (address) stands charged with the offence of (state the offence), you are hereby directed to arrest the said , and to produce him before me. Herein fail not. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) (See section 73) This warrant may be endorsed as follows:— If the said shall give bail himself in the sum of rupees with one surety in the sum of rupees (or two sureties each in the sum of rupees ) to attend before me on the day of and to continue so to attend until otherwise directed by me, he may be released. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 3 BOND AND BAIL-BOND AFTER ARREST UNDER A WARRANT (See section 83) I, (name), of , being brought before the District Magistrate of (or as the case may be) under a warrant issued to compel my appearance to answer to the charge of , do hereby bind myself to attend in the Court of on the day of next, to answer to the said charge, and to continue so to attend until otherwise directed by the Court; and, in case of my making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit, to Government, the sum of rupees Dated, this day of , 20 . (Signature) I do hereby declare myself surety for the above-named of that he shall attend before in the Court of on the day of next, to answer to the charge on which he has been arrested, and shall continue so to attend until otherwise directed by the Court; and, in case of his making default therein, I bind myself to forfeit, to Government, the sum of rupees Dated, this day of , 20 . (Signature) FORM No. 4 PROCLAMATION REQUIRING THE APPEARANCE OF A PERSON ACCUSED (See section 84) WHEREAS a complaint has been made before me that (name, description and address) has committed (or is suspected to have committed) the offence of , punishable under section of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and it has been returned to a warrant of arrest thereupon issued that the said (name) cannot be found, and whereas it has been shown to my satisfaction that the said (name) has absconded (or is concealing himself to avoid the service of the said warranty); Proclamation is hereby made that the said of is required to appear at (place) before this Court (or before me) to answer the said complaint on the day of Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 5 PROCLAMATION REQUIRING THE ATTENDANCE OF A WITNESS (See sections 84, 90 and 93) WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that (name, description and address) has committed (or is suspected to have committed) the offence of (mention the offence concisely) and a warrant has been issued to compel the attendance of (name, description and address of the witness) before this Court to be examined touching the matter of the said complaint; and whereas it has been returned to the said warrant that the said (name of witness) cannot be served, and it has been shown to my satisfaction that he has absconded (or is concealing himself to avoid the service of the said warrant); Proclamation is hereby made that the said (name) is required to appear at (place) before the Court on the day of next at o’clock to be examined touching the offence complained of. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 6 ORDER OF ATTACHMENT TO COMPEL THE ATTENDANCE OF A WITNESS (See section 85) To the officer in charge of the police station at WHEREAS a warrant has been duly issued to compel the attendance of (name, description and address) to testify concerning a complaint pending before this Court, and it has been returned to the said warrant that it cannot be served; and whereas it has been shown to my satisfaction that he has absconded (or is concealing himself to avoid the service of the said warrant); and thereupon a Proclamation has been or is being duly issued and published requiring the said to appear and give evidence at the time and place mentioned therein; This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure the movable property belonging to the said to the value of rupees which you may find within the District of and to hold the said property under attachment pending the further order of this Court, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 7 ORDER OF ATTACHMENT TO COMPEL THE APPEARANCE OF A PERSON ACCUSED (See section 85) To (name and designation of the person or persons who is or are to execute the warrant). WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that (name, description and address) has committed (or is suspected to have committed) the offence of punishable under section of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, and it has been returned to a warrant of arrest thereupon issued that the said (name) cannot be found; and whereas it has been shown to my satisfaction that the said (name) has absconded (or is concealing himself to avoid the service of the said warrant) and thereupon a Proclamation has been or is being duly issued and published requiring the said to appear to answer the said charge within days; and whereas the said is possessed of the following property, other than land paying revenue to Government, in the village (or town), of , in the District of , viz., , and an order has been made for the attachment thereof; You are hereby required to attach the said property in the manner specified in clause (a), or clause (c), or both*, of sub-section (2) of section 85, and to hold the same under attachment pending further order of this Court, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) * Strike out the one which is not applicable, depending on the nature of the property to be attached. FORM No. 8 ORDER AUTHORISING AN ATTACHMENT BY THE DISTRICT MAGISTRATE OR COLLECTOR (See section 85) To the District Magistrate/Collector of the District of WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that (name, description and address) has committed (or is suspected to have committed) the offence of , punishable under section of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and it has been returned to a warrant of arrest thereupon issued that the said (name) cannot be found; and whereas it has been shown to my satisfaction that the said (name) has absconded (or is concealing himself to avoid the service of the said warrant) and thereupon a Proclamation has been or is being duly issued and published requiring the said (name) to appear to answer the said charge within days; and whereas the said is possessed of certain land paying revenue to Government in the village (or town) of , in the District of ; You are hereby authorised and requested to cause the said land to be attached, in the manner specified in clause (a), or clause (c), or both*, of sub-section (4) of section 85, and to be held under attachment pending the further order of this Court, and to certify without delay what you may have done in pursuance of this order. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) * Strike out the one which is not desired. ———— FORM No. 9 WARRANT IN THE FIRST INSTANCE TO BRING UP A WITNESS (See section 90) To (name and designation of the police officer or other person or persons who is or are to execute the warrant). WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that (name and description of accused) of (address) has (or is suspected to have) committed the offence of (mention the offence concisely), and it appears likely that (name and description of witness) can give evidence concerning the said complaint, and whereas I have good and sufficient reason to believe that he will not attend as a witness on the hearing of the said complaint unless compelled to do so; This is to authorise and require you to arrest the said (name of witness), and on the day of to bring him before this Court , to be examined touching the offence complained of. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 10 WARRANT TO SEARCH AFTER INFORMATION OF A PARTICULAR OFFENCE (See section 96) To (name and designation of the police officer or other person or persons who is or are to execute the warrant). WHEREAS information has been laid (or complaint has been made) before me of the commission (or suspected commission) of the offence of (mention the offence concisely), and it has been made to appear to me that the production of (specify the thing clearly) is essential to the inquiry now being made (or about to be made) into the said offence (or suspected offence); This is to authorise and require you to search for the said (the thing specified) in the (describe the house or place or part thereof to which the search is to be confined), and, if found, to produce the same forthwith before this Court, returning this warrant, with an endorsement certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon its execution. Dated, this day of ,20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 11 WARRANT TO SEARCH SUSPECTED PLACE OF DEPOSIT (See section 97) To (name and designation of the police officer above the rank of a constable). WHEREAS information has been laid before me, and on due inquiry thereupon had, I have been led to believe that the (describe the house or other place) is used as a place for the deposit (or sale) of stolen property (or if for either of the other purposes expressed in the section, state the purpose in the words of the section); This is to authorise and require you to enter the said house (or other place) with such assistance as shall be required, and to use, if necessary, reasonable force for that purpose, and to search every part of the said house (or other place, or if the search is to be confined to a part, specify the part clearly), and to seize and take possession of any property (or documents, or stamps, or seals, or coins, or obscene objects, as the case may be) (add, when the case requires it) and also of any instruments and materials which you may reasonably believe to be kept for the manufacture of forged documents, or counterfeit stamps, or false seals, or counterfeit coins or counterfeit currency notes (as the case may be), and forthwith to bring before this Court such of the said things as may be taken possession of, returning this warrant, with an endorsement certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon its execution. Dated, this day of ,20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 12 BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE (See sections 125 and 126) WHEREAS I, (name), inhabitant of (place), have been called upon to enter into a bond to keep the peace for the term of or until the completion of the inquiry in the matter of now pending in the Court of , I hereby bind myself not to commit a breach of the peace, or do any act that may probably occasion a breach of the peace, during the said term or until the completion of the said inquiry and, in case of my making default therein, I hereby bind myself to forfeit, to Government, the sum of rupees Dated, this day of ,20 . (Signature) FORM No. 13 BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR (See sections 127, 128 and 129) WHEREAS I, (name), inhabitant of (place), have been called upon to enter into a bond to be of good behaviour to Government and all the citizens of India for the term of (state the period) or until the completion of the inquiry in the matter of now pending in the Court of , I hereby bind myself to be of good behaviour to Government and all the citizens of India during the said term or until the completion of the said inquiry; and, in case of my making default therein, I hereby bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees Dated, this day of ,20 . (Signature) (Where a bond with sureties is to be executed, add) We do hereby declare ourselves sureties for the above-named that he will be of good behaviour to Government and all the citizens of India during the said term or until the completion of the said inquiry; and, in case of his making default therein, we bind ourselves, jointly and severally, to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees Dated, this day of ,20 . (Signature) FORM No. 14 SUMMONS ON INFORMATION OF A PROBABLE BREACH OF THE PEACE (See section 132) To of WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me by credible information that (state the substance of the information), and that you are likely to commit a breach of the peace (or by which act a breach of the peace will probably be occasioned), you are hereby required to attend in person (or by a duly authorised agent) at the office of the Magistrate of on the day of 20 , at ten o’clock in the forenoon, to show cause why you should not be required to enter into a bond for rupees [when sureties are required, add, and also to give security by the bond of one (or two, as the case may be) surety (or sureties) in the sum of rupees (each if more than one)], that you will keep the peace for the term of Dated, this day of ,20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 15 WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON FAILURE TO FIND SECURITY TO KEEP THE PEACE (See section 141) To the Officer in charge of the Jail at WHEREAS (name and address) appeared before me in person (or by his authorised agent) on the day of in obedience to a summons calling upon him to show cause why he should not enter into a bond for rupees with one surety (or a bond with two sureties each in rupees ), that he, the said (name) would keep the peace for the period of months; and whereas an order was then made requiring the said (name) to enter into and find such security (state the security ordered when it differs from that mentioned in the summons), and he has failed to comply with the said order; This is to authorise and require you to receive the said (name) into your custody, together with this warrant, and him safely to keep in the said Jail for the said period of (term of imprisonment) unless he shall in the meantime be lawfully ordered to be released, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. Dated, this day of ,20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 16 WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON FAILURE TO FIND SECURITY FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR (See section 141) To the Officer in charge of the Jail at WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that (name and description) has been concealing his presence within the district of and that there is reason to believe that he is doing so with a view to committing a cognizable offence; or WHEREAS evidence of the general character of (name and description) has been adduced before me and recorded, from which it appears that he is an habitual robber (or house- breaker, etc., as the case may be); AND WHEREAS an order has been recorded stating the same and requiring the said (name) to furnish security for his good behaviour for the term of (state the period) by entering into a bond with one surety (or two or more sureties, as the case may be), himself for rupees , and the said surety (or each of the said sureties) rupees , and the said (name) has failed to comply with the said order and for such default has been adjudged imprisonment for (state the term) unless the said security be sooner furnished; This is to authorise and require you receive the said ( name) into your custody, together with this warrant and him safely to keep in the Jail, or if he is already in prison, be detained therein, for the said period of (term of imprisonment) unless he shall in the meantime be lawfully ordered to be released, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. Dated, this day of ,20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 17 WARRANT TO DISCHARGE A PERSON IMPRISONED ON FAILURE TO GIVE SECURITY (See sections 141 and 142) To the Officer in charge of the Jail at (or other officer in whose custody the person is). WHEREAS (name and description of prisoner) was committed to your custody under warrant of the Court, dated the day of 20; and has since duly given security under section of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. or WHEREAS (name and description of prisoner) was committed to your custody under warrant of the Court, dated the day of 19 ; and there have appeared to me sufficient grounds for the opinion that he can be released without hazard to the community; This is to authorise and require you forthwith to discharge the said (name) from your custody unless he is liable to be detained for some other cause. Dated, this day of ,20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 18 WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FAILURE TO PAY MAINTENANCE (See section 145) To the Officer in charge of the Jail at WHEREAS (name, description and address) has been proved before me to be possessed of sufficient means to maintain his wife (name) [or his child (name) or his father or mother (name), who is by reason of (state the reason) unable to maintain herself (or himself)] and to have neglected (or refused) to do so, and an order has been duly made requiring the said ( name) to allow to his said wife (or child or father or mother) for maintenance the monthly sum of rupees ; and whereas it has been further proved that the said (name) in wilful disregard of the said order has failed to pay rupees , being the amount of the allowance for the month (or months) of ; And thereupon an order was made adjudging him to undergo imprisonment in the said Jail for the period of ; This is to authorise and require you receive the said (name) into your custody in the said Jail, together with this warrant, and there carry the said order into execution according to law, returning this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. Dated, this day of ,20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 19 WARRANT TO ENFORCE THE PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE BY ATTACHMENT AND SALE (See section 144) To (name and designation of the police officer or other person to execute the warrant). WHEREAS an order has been duly made requiring (name) to allow to his said wife (or child or father or mother) for maintenance the monthly sum of rupees , and whereas the said (name) in wilful disregard of the said order has failed to pay rupees , being the amount of the allowance for the month (or months) of This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable property belonging to the said (name) which may be found within the district of , and if within (state the number of days or hours allowed) next after such attachment the said sum shall not be paid (or forthwith), to sell the movable property attached, or so much thereof as shall be sufficient to satisfy the said sum, returning this warrant, with an endorsement certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon its execution. Dated, this day of ,20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 20 ORDER FOR THE REMOVAL OF NUISANCES (See section 152) To (name, description and address). WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you have caused an obstruction (or nuisance) to persons using the public roadway (or other public place) which, etc., (describe the road or public place) by, etc., (state what it is that causes the obstruction or nuisance), and that such obstruction (or nuisance) still exists; or WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you are carrying on, as owner, or manager, the trade or occupation of (state the particular trade or occupation and the place where it is carried on), and that the same is injurious to the public health (or comfort) by reason (state briefly in what manner the injurious effects are caused), and should be suppressed or removed to different place; or WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you are the owner (or are in possession of or have the control over) a certain tank (or well or excavation) adjacent to the public way (describe the thoroughfare), and that the safety of the public is endangered by reason of the said tank (or well or excavation) being without a fence or insecurely fenced); or WHEREAS, etc., etc., (as the case may be); I do hereby direct and require you within (state the time allowed) (state what is required to be done to abate the nuisance) or to appear at in the Court of on the day of next, and to show cause why this order should not be enforced; or I do hereby direct and require you within (state the time allowed) to cease carrying on the said trade or occupation at the said place, and not again to carry on the same, or to remove the said trade from the place where it is now carried on, or to appear, etc.; or I do hereby direct and require you within (state the time allowed) to put up a sufficient fence (state the kind of fence and the part to be fenced); or to appear, etc.; or I do hereby direct and require you, etc., etc. (as the case may be). Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 21 MAGISTRATE’S NOTICE AND PEREMPTORY ORDER (See section 160) To (name, description and address). I HEREBY give you notice that it has been found that the order issued on the day of requiring you (state substantially the requisition in the order) is reasonable and proper. Such order has been made absolute, and I hereby direct and require you to obey the said order within (state the time allowed), on peril of the penalty provided by the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 for disobedience thereto. Dated, this day of ,20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 22 INJUNCTION TO PROVIDE AGAINST IMMINENT DANGER PENDING INQUIRY (See section 161) To (name, description and address). WHEREAS the inquiry into the conditional order issued by me on the day of ,20 , is pending, and it has been made to appear to me that the nuisance mentioned in the said order is attended with such imminent danger or injury of a serious kind to the public as to render necessary immediate measures to prevent such danger or injury, I do hereby, under the provisions of section 161 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, direct and enjoin you forthwith to (state plainly what is required to be done as a temporary safeguard), pending the result of the inquiry. Dated, this day of ,20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 23 MAGISTRATE’S ORDER PROHIBITING THE REPETITION, ETC., OF A NUISANCE (See section 162) To (name, description and address). WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that, etc. (state the proper recital, guided by Form No. 20 or Form No. 24, as the case may be); I do hereby strictly order and enjoin you not to repeat or continue, the said nuisance. Dated, this day of ,20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 24 MAGISTRATE’S ORDER TO PREVENT OBSTRUCTION, RIOT, ETC. (See section 163) To (name, description and address). WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you are in possession (or have the management) of (describe clearly the property), and that, in digging a drain on the said land, you are about to throw or place a portion of the earth and stones dug-up upon the adjoining public road, so as to occasion risk of obstruction to persons using the road; or WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you and a number of other persons (mention the class of persons) are about to meet and proceed in a procession along the public street, etc., (as the case may be) and that such procession is likely to lead to a riot or an affray; or WHEREAS, etc., etc., (as the case may be); I do hereby order you not to place or permit to be placed any of the earth or stones dug from land on any part of the said road; or I do hereby prohibit the procession passing along the said street, and strictly warn and enjoin you not to take any part in such procession (or as the case recited may require). Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) —————— FORM No. 25 MAGISTRATE’S ORDER DECLARING PARTY ENTITLED TO RETAIN POSSESSION OF LAND, ETC., IN DISPUTE (See section 164) It appears to me, on the grounds duly recorded, that a dispute, likely to induce a breach of the peace, existed between (describe the parties by name and residence or residence only if the dispute be between bodies of villagers) concerning certain (state concisely the subject of dispute), situate within my local jurisdiction, all the said parties were called upon to give in a written statement of their respective claims as to the fact of actual possession of the said (the subject of dispute), and being satisfied by due inquiry had thereupon, without reference to the merits of the claim of either of the said parties to the legal right of possession, that the claim of actual possession by the said (name or names or description) is true; I do decide and declare that he is (or they are) in possession of the said (the subject of dispute) and entitled to retain such possession until ousted by due course of law, and do strictly forbid any disturbance of his (or their) possession in the meantime. Dated, this day of ,20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 26 WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT IN THE CASE OF A DISPUTE AS TO THE POSSESSION OF LAND, ETC. (See section 165) To the officer in charge of the police station at (or, To the Collector of ). WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that a dispute likely to induce a breach of the peace, existed between (describe the parties concerned by name and residence, or residence only if the dispute be between bodies of villagers) concerning certain (state concisely the subject of dispute) situate within the limits of my jurisdiction, and the said parties were thereupon duly called upon to state in writing their respective claims as to the fact of actual possession of the said (the subject of dispute), and whereas, upon due inquiry into the said claims, I have decided that neither of the said parties was in possession of the said (the subject of dispute) (or I am unable to satisfy myself as to which of the said parties was in possession as aforesaid); This is to authorise and require you to attach the said (the subject of dispute) by taking and keeping possession thereof, and to hold the same under attachment until the decree or order of a competent Court determining the rights of the parties, or the claim to possession, shall have been obtained, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. Dated, this day of ,20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 27 MAGISTRATE’S ORDER PROHIBITING THE DOING OF ANYTHING ON LAND OR WATER (See section 166) A dispute having arisen concerning the right of use of (state concisely the subject of dispute) situate within my local jurisdiction, the possession of which land (or water) is claimed exclusively by (describe the person or persons), and it appears to me, on due inquiry into the same, that the said land (or water) has been open to the enjoyment of such use by the public (or if by an individual or a class of persons, describe him or them) and (if the use can be enjoyed throughout the year) that the said use has been enjoyed within three months of the institution of the said inquiry (or if the use is enjoyable only at a particular season, say, “during the last of the seasons at which the same is capable of being enjoyed”); I do order that the said (the claimant or claimants of possession) or any one in their interest, shall not take (or retain) possession of the said land (or water) to the exclusion of the enjoyment of the right of use aforesaid, until he (or they) shall obtain the decree or order of a competent Court adjudging him (or them) to be entitled to exclusive possession; Dated, this day of ,20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 28 BOND AND BAIL-BOND ON A PRELIMINARY INQUIRY BEFORE A POLICE OFFICER (See section 189) I, (name), of , being charged with the offence of , and after inquiry required to appear before the Magistrate of or and after inquiry called upon to enter into my own recognizance to appear when required, do hereby bind myself to appear at , in the Court of , on the day of next (or on such day as I may hereafter be required to attend) to answer further to the said charge, and in case of my making default herein. I bind myself to forfeit to Government, the sum of rupees; Dated, this day of , 20 . (Signature) I hereby declare myself (or we jointly and severally declare ourselves and each of us) surety (or sureties) for the above said (name) that he shall attend at in the Court of , on the day of next (or on such day as he may hereafter be required to attend), further to answer to the charge pending against him, and, in case of his making default therein, I hereby bind myself (or we hereby bind ourselves) to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees; Dated, this day of , 20 . (Signature) —————— FORM No. 29 BOND TO PROSECUTE OR GIVE EVIDENCE (See section 190) I, (name) of (place), do hereby bind myself to attend at in the Court of at o’clock on the day of next and then and there to prosecute (or to prosecute and give evidence) (or to give evidence) in the matter of a charge of against one A.B., and, in case of making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees…….. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Signature) FORM No. 30 SPECIAL SUMMONS TO A PERSON ACCUSED OF A PETTY OFFENCE To, (See section 229) (Name of the accused) of (address) WHEREAS your attendance is necessary to answer a charge of a petty offence (state shortly the offence charged), you are hereby required to appear in person (or by pleader) before (Magistrate) of on the day of 20 , or if you desire to plead guilty to the charge without appearing before the Magistrate, to transmit before the aforesaid date the plea of guilty in writing and the sum of rupees as fine, or if you desire to appear by pleader and to plead guilty through such pleader, to authorise such pleader in writing to make such a plea of guilty on your behalf and to pay the fine through such pleader. Herein fail not. Dated, this day of ,20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) (Note.—The amount of fine specified in this summons shall not exceed on hundred rupees.) FORM No. 31 NOTICE OF COMMITMENT BY MAGISTRATE TO PUBLIC PROSECUTOR (See section 232) The Magistrate of hereby gives notice that he has committed one for trial at the next Sessions; and the Magistrate hereby instructs the Public Prosecutor to conduct the prosecution of the said case. The charge against the accused is that, etc. (state the offence as in the charge) Dated, this day of ,20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) —————— FORM No. 32 CHARGES (See sections 234, 235 and 236) I. CHARGES WITH ONE-HEAD (1) (a) I, (name and office of Magistrate, etc.), hereby charge you (name of accused person) as follows:— (b) On section 147.—That you, on or about the day of , at , waged war against the Government of India and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 121 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, and within the cognizance of this Court. (c) And I hereby direct that you be tried by this Court on the said charge. (Signature and seal of the Magistrate) [To be substituted for (b)]:— (2) On section 151.—That you, on or about the day of , at , with the intention of inducing the President of India [or, as the case may be, the Governor of (name of State)] to refrain from exercising a lawful power as such President (or, as the case may be, the Government) assaulted President (or, as the case may be, the Governor), and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 151 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and within the cognizance of this Court. (3) On section 199.—That you, on or about the day of , at , did (or omitted to do, as the case may be) , such conduct being contrary to the provisions of Act , section , and known by you to be prejudicial to , and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 199 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and within the cognizance of this Court. (4) On section 199.—That you, on or about the day of , at , in the course of the trial of before , stated in evidence that “ ” which statement you either knew or believed to be false, or did not believe to be true, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 230 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and within the cognizance of this Court. (5) On section 105.—That you, on or about the day of , at , committed culpable homicide not amounting to murder, causing the death of , and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 105 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and within the cognizance of this Court. (6) On section 108.—That you, on or about the day of , at , abetted the commission of suicide by A.B., a person in a state of intoxication, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 108 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and within the cognizance of this Court. (7) On section 117(2).—That you, on or about the day of , at , voluntarily caused grievous hurt to , and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 117(2) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and within the cognizance of this Court. (8) On section 310(2).—That you, on or about the day of , at , robbed (state the name), and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 310(2) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and within the cognizance of this Court. (9) On section 311(2).—That you, on or about the day of , at , committed dacoity, an offence punishable under section 311(2) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of this Court. II. CHARGES WITH TWO OR MORE HEADS (1) (a) I, (name and office of Magistrate, etc.), hereby charge you (name of accused person) as follows:— (b) On section 179.—First—That you, on or about the day of , at , knowing a coin to be counterfeit, delivered the same to another person, by name, A.B., as genuine, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 179 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the Court of Session. Secondly—That you, on or about the day of , at , knowing a coin to be counterfeit attempted to induce another person, by name, A.B., to receive it as genuine, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 179 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the Court of Session. (c) And I hereby direct that you be tried by the said Court on the said charge. (Signature and seal of the Magistrate) [To be substituted for (b)]:— (2) On sections 103 and 105.—First—That you, on or about the day of , at , committed murder by causing the death of , and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 103 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the Court of Session. Secondly—That you, on or about the day of , at , by causing the death of , committed culpable homicide not amounting to murder, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 105 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the Court of Session. (3) On sections 304(2) and 308.—First—That you, on or about the day of , at , committed theft, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 304(2) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the Court of Session. Secondly—That you, on or about the day of , at , committed theft, having made preparation for causing death to a person in order to the committing of such theft, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 308 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the Court of Session. Thirdly—That you, on or about the day of , at , committed theft, having made preparation for causing restraint to a person in order to the effecting of your escape after the committing of such theft, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 308 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the Court of Session. Fourthly—That you, on or about the day of , at , committed theft, having made preparation for causing fear of hurt to a person in order to the restraining of property taken by such theft and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 308 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the Court of Session. (4) Alternative charge on section 230.—That you, on or about the day of , at , in the course of the inquiry into , before , stated in evidence that “ ”, and that you, on or about the day of , at , in the course of the trial of , before , stated in the evidence that “ ”, one of which statements you either knew or believed to be false, or did not believe to be true, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 230 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the Court of Session. (In cases tried by Magistrates substitute “within my cognizance” for “within the cognizance of the Court of Session”.) III. CHARGES FOR THEFT AFTER PREVIOUS CONVICTION I, (name and office of Magistrate, etc.) hereby charge you (name of accused person) as follows: — That you, on or about the day of , at , committed theft, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 304(2) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and within the cognizance of the Court of Session (or Magistrate, as the case may be). And you, the said (name of accused), stand further charged that you, before the committing of the said offence, that is to say, on the day of , had been convicted by the (state Court by which conviction was had) at of an offence punishable under Chapter XVIII of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 with imprisonment for a term of three years, that is to say, the offence of house-breaking by night (describe the offence in the words used in the section under which the accused was convicted), which conviction is still in full force and effect, and that you are thereby liable to enhanced punishment under section 16 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. And I hereby direct that you be tried, etc. FORM No. 33 SUMMONS TO WITNESS (See sections 63 and 267) To of WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that (name of the accused) of (address) has (or is suspected to have) committed the offence of (state the offence concisely with time and place), and it appears to me that you are likely to give material evidence or to produce any document or other thing for the prosecution; You are hereby summoned to appear before this Court on the day of next at ten o’clock in the forenoon, to produce such document or thing or to testify what you know concerning the matter of the said complaint, and not to depart thence without leave of the Court; and you are hereby warned that, if you shall without just excuse neglect or refuse to appear on the said date, a warrant will be issued to compel your attendance. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 34 WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON A SENTENCE OF IMPRISONMENT OR FINE IF PASSED BY A COURT (See sections 258, 271 and 278) To the Officer in charge of Jail at WHEREAS on the day of , (name of the prisoner), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be) prisoner in case No. of the Calendar for 20 , was convicted before me (name and official designation) of the offence of (mention the offence or offences concisely) under section (or sections) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (or of Act ), and was sentenced to (state the punishment fully and distinctly); This is to authorise and require you to receive the said (prisoner’s name) into your custody in the said Jail, together with this warrant, and thereby carry the aforesaid sentence into execution according to law. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 35 WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FAILURE TO PAY COMPENSATION (See section 273) To the Officer in charge of Jail at WHEREAS (name and description) has brought against (name and description of the accused person) the complaint that (mention it concisely) and the same has been dismissed on the ground that there was no reasonable ground for making the accusation against the said ( name) and the order of dismissal awards payment by the said (name of complainant) of the sum of rupees as compensation; and whereas the said sum has not been paid and an order has been made for his simple imprisonment in Jail for the period of days, unless the aforesaid sum be sooner paid; This is to authorise and require you to receive the said (name) into your custody, together with this warrant, and him safely to keep in the said Jail for the said period of (term of imprisonment), subject to the provisions of section 10(6b) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, unless the said sum be sooner paid, and on the receipt thereof, forthwith to set him at liberty, returning this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 36 ORDER REQUIRING PRODUCTION IN COURT OF PERSON IN PRISON FOR ANSWERING TO CHARGE OF OFFENCE (See section 302) To the Officer in charge of Jail at WHEREAS the attendance of (name of prisoner) at present confined/detained in the above-mentioned prison, is required in this Court to answer to a charge of (state shortly the offence charged) or for the purpose of a proceeding (state shortly the particulars of the proceeding): You are hereby required to produce the said under safe and sure conduct before this Court at on the day of , 20 , by A.M. there to answer to the said charge, or for the purpose of the said proceeding, and after this Court has dispensed with his further attendance, cause him to be conveyed under safe and sure conduct back to the said prison. And you are further required to inform the said of the contents of this order and deliver to him the attached copy thereof. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) Countersigned. (Seal) (Signature) FORM No. 37 ORDER REQUIRING PRODUCTION IN COURT OF PERSON IN PRISON FOR GIVING EVIDENCE (See section 302) To the Officer in charge of the Jail at WHEREAS complaint has been made before this Court that (name of the accused) of has committed the offence of (state offence concisely with time and place) and it appears that (name of prisoner) at present confined/detained in the above-mentioned prison, is likely to give material evidence for the prosecution/defence; You are hereby required to produce the said under safe and sure conduct before this Court at on the day of , 20 , by A.M. there to give evidence in the matter now pending before this Court, and after this Court has dispensed with his further attendance, cause him to be conveyed under safe and sure conduct back to the said prison; And you are further required to inform the said of the contents of this order and deliver to him the attached copy thereof. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) Countersigned. (Seal) (Signature) FORM No. 38 WARRANT OF COMMITMENT IN CERTAIN CASES OF CONTEMPT WHEN A FINE IS IMPOSED (See section 384) To the Officer in charge of the Jail at WHEREAS at a Court held before me on this day (name and description of the offender) in the presence (or view) of the Court committed wilful contempt; And whereas for such contempt the said (name of the offender) has been adjudged by the Court to pay a fine of rupees , or in default to suffer simple imprisonment for the period of (state the number of months or days); This is to authorise and require you to receive the said (name of the offender) into your custody, together with this warrant, and him safely to keep in the said Jail for the said period of (term of imprisonment), unless the said fine be sooner paid; and, on the receipt thereof, forthwith to set him at liberty, returning this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 39 MAGISTRATE’S OR JUDGE’S WARRANT OF COMMITMENT OF WITNESS REFUSING TO ANSWER OR TO PRODUCE DOCUMENT (See section 388) To (name and designation of officer of Court) WHEREAS (name and description), being summoned (or brought before this Court) as a witness and this day required to give evidence on an inquiry into an alleged offence, refused to answer a certain question (or certain questions) put to him touching the said alleged offence, and duly recorded, or having been called upon to produce any document has refused to produce such document, without alleging any just excuse for such refusal, and for his refusal has been ordered to be detained in custody for ( term of detention adjudged); This is to authorise and require you to take the said (name) into custody, and him safely to keep in your custody for the period of days, unless in the meantime he shall consent to be examined and to answer the questions asked of him, or to produce the document called for from him, and on the last of the said days, or forthwith on such consent being known, to bring him before this Court to be dealt with according to law, returning this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 40 WARRANT OF COMMITMENT UNDER SENTENCE OF DEATH (See section 407) To the Officer in charge of the Jail at WHEREAS at the Session held before me on the day of , 20 , (name of prisoner), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be), prisoner in case No. of the Calendar for 20 at the said Session, was duly convicted of the offence of culpable homicide amounting to murder under section of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and sentenced to death, subject to the confirmation of the said sentence by the Court of; This is to authorise and require you to receive the said (prisoner’s name) into your custody in the said Jail, together with this warrant, and him there safely to keep until you shall receive the further warrant or order of this Court, carrying into effect the order of the said Court. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 41 WARRANT AFTER A COMMUTATION OF A SENTENCE (See sections 427, 454 and 457) To the Officer in charge of the Jail at WHEREAS at a Session held on the day of , 20 , (name of the prisoner), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be) prisoner in case No. of the Calendar for 20 at the said Session, was convicted of the offence of , punishable under section of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, and sentenced to , and was thereupon committed to your custody; and whereas by the order of the Court of (a duplicate of which is hereunto annexed) the punishment adjudged by the said sentence has been commuted to the punishment of imprisonment for life; This is to authorise and require you safely to keep the said (prisoner’s name) in your custody in the said Jail, as by law is required, until he shall be delivered over by you to the proper authority and custody for the purpose of his undergoing the punishment of imprisonment for life under the said order, or if the mitigated sentence is one of imprisonment, say, after the words “custody in the said Jail”, “and there to carry into execution the punishment of imprisonment under the said order according to law”. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 42 WARRANT OF EXECUTION OF A SENTENCE OF DEATH (See sections 454 and 455) To the Officer in charge of the Jail at WHEREAS (name of the prisoner), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be) Prisoner in case No. of the Calendar for 20 at the Session held before me on the day of , 20 , has been by a warrant of the Court, dated the day of , committed to your custody under sentence of death; and whereas the order of the High Court at confirming the said sentence has been received by this Court; This is to authorise and require you to carry the said sentence into execution by causing the said to be hanged by the neck until he be dead, at (time and place of execution), and to return this warrant to the Court with an endorsement certifying that the sentence has been executed. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 43 WARRANT TO LEVY A FINE BY ATTACHMENT AND SALE (See section 462) To (name and designation of the police officer or other person or persons who is or are to execute the warrant). WHEREAS (name and description of the offender) was on the day of , 20 , convicted before me of the offence of (mention the offence concisely), and sentenced to pay a fine of rupees ; and whereas the said (name), although required to pay the said fine, has not paid the same or any part thereof; This is to authorize and require you to attach any movable property belonging to the said (name), which may be found within the district of ; and, if within (state the number of days or hours allowed) next after such attachment the said sum shall not be paid (or forthwith), to sell the movable property attached, or so much thereof as shall be sufficient to satisfy the said fine, returning this warrant, with an endorsement certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon its execution. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 44 WARRANT FOR RECOVERY OF FINE (See section 462) To the Collector of the district of WHEREAS (name, address and description of the offender) was on the day of , 20 , convicted before me of the offence of (mention the offence concisely), and sentenced to pay a fine of rupees ; and WHEREAS the said (name), although require to pay the said fine, has not paid the same or any part of thereof; You are hereby authorised and requested to realise the amount of the said fine as arrears of land revenue from the movable or immovable property, or both, of the said (name) and to certify without delay what you have done in pursuance of this order. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) [FORM No. 44A BOND FOR APPEARANCE OF OFFENDER RELEASED PENDING REALISATION OF FINE [See section 465 (1) (b)] WHEREAS I, (name) inhabitant of (place), have been sentenced to pay a fine of rupees and in default of payment thereof to undergo imprisonment for ; and whereas the Court has been pleased to order my release on condition of my executing a bond for my appearance on the following date (or dates), namely:— I hereby bind myself to appear before the Court of at o’clock on the following date (or dates), namely:— and, in case of making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Signature) WHERE A BOND WITH SURETIES IS TO BE EXECUTED, ADD— We do hereby declare ourselves sureties for the above-named that he will appear before the Court of on the following date (or dates), namely:— And, in case of his making default therein, we bind ourselves jointly and severally to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees. (Signature).] FORM No. 45 BOND AND BAIL-BOND FOR ATTENDANCE BEFORE OFFICER IN CHARGE OF POLICE STATION OR COURT (See sections 480, 481, 482, 483, 484 and 487) I, (name), of (place), having been arrested or detained without warrant by the Officer in charge of police station (or having been brought before the Court of ), charged with the offence of , and required to give security for my attendance before such Officer of Court on condition that I shall attend such Officer or Court on every day on which any investigation or trial is held with regard to such charge, and in case of my making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Signature) I hereby declare myself (or we jointly and severally declare ourselves and each of us) surety (or sureties) for the above said ( name) that he shall attend the Officer in charge of police station or the Court of on every day on which any investigation into the charge is made or any trial on such charge is held, that he shall be, and appear, before such Officer or Court for the purpose of such investigation or to answer the charge against him (as the case may be), and, in case of his making default herein, I hereby bind myself (or we, hereby bind ourselves) to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Signature) FORM No. 46 WARRANT TO DISCHARGE A PERSON IMPRISONED ON FAILURE TO GIVE SECURITY (See section 489) To the Officer in charge of the Jail at (or other officer in whose custody the person is) WHEREAS (name and description of prisoner) was committed to your custody under warrant of this Court, dated the day of , and has since with his surety (or sureties) duly executed a bond under section 487 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita; This is to authorise and require you forthwith to discharge the said (name) from your custody, unless he is liable to be detained for some other matter. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) [FORM No. 47 WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT TO ENFORCE A BOND (See section 493) To the Police Officer in charge of the police station at WHEREAS (name, description and address of person) has failed to appear on (mention the occasion) pursuant to his recognizance, and has by default forfeited to Government the sum of rupees (the penalty in the bond); and whereas the said (name of person) has, on due notice to him, failed to pay the said sum or show any sufficient cause why payment should not be enforced against him; This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable property of the said (name) that you may find within the district of , by seizure and detention, and, if the said amount be not paid within , days to sell the property so attached or so much of it as may be sufficient to realise the amount aforesaid, and to make return of what you have done under this warrant immediately upon its execution. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature).] FORM No. 48 NOTICE TO SURETY ON BREACH OF A BOND (See section 493) To of WHEREAS on the day of , 20 , you became surety for (name) of (place) that he should appear before this Court on the day of and bound yourself in default thereof to forfeit the sum of rupees to Government; and whereas the said (name) has failed to appear before this Court and by reason of such default you have forfeited the aforesaid sum of rupees. You are hereby required to pay the said penalty or show cause, within days from this date, why payment of the said sum should not be enforced against you. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 49 NOTICE TO SURETY OF FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR (See section 493) To of WHEREAS on the day of , 20 , you became surety by a bond for (name) of (place) that he would be of good behaviour for the period of and bound yourself in default thereof to forfeit the sum of rupees to Government; and whereas the said (name) has been convicted of the offence of (mention the offence concisely) committed since you became such surety, whereby your security bond has become forfeited; You are hereby required to pay the said penalty of rupees or to show cause within days why it should not be paid. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 50 WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT AGAINST A SURETY (See section 493) To of WHEREAS (name, description and address) has bound himself as surety for the appearance of (mention the condition of the bond) and the said (name) has made default, and thereby forfeited to Government the sum of rupees (the penalty in the bond); This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable property of the said (name) which you may find within the district of , by seizure and detention; and, if the said amount be not paid within days, to sell the property so attached, or so much of it as may be sufficient to realise the amount aforesaid, and make return of what you have done under this warrant immediately upon its execution. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 51 WARRANT OF COMMITMENT OF THE SURETY OF AN ACCUSED PERSON ADMITTED TO BAIL (See section 493) To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at WHEREAS (name and description of surety) has bound himself as a surety for the appearance of (state the condition of the bond) and the said (name) has therein made default whereby the penalty mentioned in the said bond has been forfeited to Government; and whereas the said (name of surety) has, on due notice to him, failed to pay the said sum or show any sufficient cause why payment should not be enforced against him, and the same cannot be recovered by attachment and sale of his movable property, and an order has been made for his imprisonment in the Civil Jail for (Specify the period); This is to authorise and require you, the said Superintendent (or Keeper) to receive the said (name) into your custody with the warrant and to keep him safely in the said Jail for the said (term of imprisonment), and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 52 NOTICE TO THE PRINCIPAL OF FORFEITURE OF BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE (See section 493) To (name, description and address) WHEREAS on the day of , 20 , you entered into a bond not to commit, etc., (as in the bond), and proof of the forfeiture of the same has been given before me and duly recorded; You are hereby called upon to pay the said penalty of rupees or to show cause before me within days why payment of the same should not be enforced against you. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 53 WARRANT TO ATTACH THE PROPERTY OF THE PRINCIPAL ON BREACH OF A BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE (See section 493) To (name and designation of police officer), at the police station of WHEREAS (name and description) did, on the day of , 20 , enter into a bond for the sum of rupees binding himself not to commit a breach of the peace, etc., (as in the bond), and proof of the forfeiture of the said bond has been given before me and duly recorded; and whereas notice has been given to the said (name) calling upon him to show cause why the said sum should not be paid, and he has failed to do so or to pay the said sum; This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure movable property belonging to the said (name) to the value of rupees , which you may find within the district of , and, if the said sum be not paid within , to sell the property so attached, or so much of it as may be sufficient to realize the same; and to make return of what you have done under this warrant immediately upon its execution. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 54 WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON BREACH OF A BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE (See section 493) To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at WHEREAS proof has been given before me and duly recorded that (name and description) has committed a breach of the bond entered into by him to keep the peace, whereby he has forfeited to Government the sum of rupees ; and whereas the said (name) has failed to pay the said sum or to show cause why the said sum should not be paid, although duly called upon to do so, and payment thereof cannot be enforced by attachment of his movable property, and an order has been made for the imprisonment of the said (name) in the Civil Jail of the period of (term of imprisonment); This is to authorise and require you, the said Superintendent (or Keeper) of the said Civil Jail to receive the said (name) into your custody, together with this warrant, and to keep his safely in the said Jail for the said period of (term of imprisonment), and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) FORM No. 55 WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT AND SALE ON FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR (See section 493) To the Police Officer in charge of the police station at WHEREAS (name, description and address) did, on the day of , 20 , give security by bond in the sum of rupees for the good behaviour of (name, etc., of the principal), and proof has been given before me and duly recorded of the commission by the said (name) of the offence of whereby the said bond has been forfeited; and whereas notice has been given to the said (name) calling upon him to show cause why the said sum should not be paid, and he has failed to do so to pay the said sum; This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure movable property belonging to the said (name) to the value of rupees which you may find within the district of , and, if the said sum be not paid within , to sell the property so attached, or so much of it as may be sufficient to realise the same, and to make return of what you have done under this warrant immediately upon its execution. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) Draft Bill Legislative Deptt. 08-8-2023 FORM No. 56 WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR (See section 493) To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at WHEREAS (name, description and address) did, on the day of , 20 , give security by bond in the sum of rupees for the good behaviour of (name, etc., of the principal), and proof of the breach of the said bond has been given before me and duly recorded, whereby the said (name) has forfeited to Government the sum of rupees , and whereas he has failed to pay the said sum or to show cause why the said sum should not be paid although duly called upon to do so, and payment thereof cannot be enforced by attachment of his movable property, and an order has been made for the imprisonment of the said (name) in the Civil Jail for the period of (term of imprisonment); This is to authorise and require you, the Superintendent (or Keeper), to receive the said (name) into your custody, together with this warrant, and to keep him safely in the said Jail for the said period of (term of imprisonment), returning this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. Dated, this day of , 20 . (Seal of the Court) (Signature) STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 regulates the procedure for arrest, investigation, inquiry and trial of offences under the Indian Penal Code and under any other law governing criminal offences. The Code provides for a mechanism for conducting trials in a criminal case. It gives the procedure for registering a complaint, conducting a trial and passing an order, and filing an appeal against any order. 2. Fast and efficient justice system is an essential component of good governance. However, delay in delivery of justice due to complex legal procedures, large pendency of cases in the Courts, low conviction rates, low level of uses of technology in legal system, delays in investigation system, complex procedures, inadequate use of forensics are the biggest hurdles in speedy delivery of justice, which impacts poor man adversely. In order to address these issues a citizens centric criminal procedures are need of hour. 3. The experience of seven decades of Indian democracy calls for comprehensive review of our criminal laws, including the Code of Criminal Procedure and adopt them in accordance with the contemporary needs and aspirations of the people. 4. The Government with the mantra, "Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishwas and Sabka Prayas" is committed to ensure speedy justice to all citizens in conformity with these constitutional democratic aspirations. The Government is committed to make comprehensive review of the framework of criminal laws to provide accessible and speedy justice to all. 5. In view of the above, it is proposed to repeal the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and enact a new law, namely, the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. It provides for the use of technology and forensic sciences in the investigation of crime and furnishing and lodging of information, service of summons, etc., through electronic communication. Specific time-lines have been prescribed for time bound investigation, trial and pronouncement of judgements. Citizen centric approach have been adopted for supply of copy of first information report to the victim and to inform them about the progress of investigation, including by digital means. In cases where the punishment is seven years or more, the victim shall be given an opportunity of being heard before withdrawal of the case by the Government. Summary trial has been made mandatory for petty and less serious cases. The accused persons may be examined through electronic means, like video conferencing. The magisterial system has also been streamlined. 6. The Notes on Clauses explains the various provisions of the Bill. 7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. NEW DELHI; The 9th August, 2023. AMIT SHAH. NOTES ON CLAUSES Clause 1 of the Bill seeks to provide for short title, extent and commencement. Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide to Definitions. This Clause relates to definition of certain expressions used in the proposed legislation. Clause 3 of the Bill relates to Construction of references. Clause 4 of the Bill relates to Trial of offences under Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita and other laws. This Clause provides all offences under the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with according to the provisions. Clause 5 of the Bill relates to Saving. This Clause provides, in the absence of a specific provision to the contrary, affect any special or local law for the time being in force, or any special jurisdiction or power conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by any other law for the time being in force. Clause 6 of the Bill relates to Classes of Criminal Courts. This Clause provides in every State, the Criminal Courts are established, namely, Courts of Session; Judicial Magistrates of the first class; Judicial Magistrates of the second class; and Executive Magistrates. Clause 7 of the Bill relates to Territorial divisions. This Clause provides every State shall be a sessions division or shall consist of sessions divisions; and every sessions divisions shall, for the purposes of this Sanhita, be a district or consist of districts. Clause 8 of the Bill relates to Court of Session. This Clause provides the State Government shall establish a Court of Session for every sessions division, presided over by a Judge, to be appointed by the High Court. Clause 9 of the Bill relates to Courts of Judicial Magistrates. This Clause provides every district there shall be established as many Courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first class and of the second class, and at such places, as the State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, by notification. Clause 10 of the Bill relates to Chief Judicial Magistrate and Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate. This Clause provides every district, the High Court shall appoint a Judicial Magistrate of the first class to be the Chief Judicial Magistrate Clause 11 of the Bill relates to Special Judicial Magistrates. This Clause provides the High Court may, if requested by the Central or State Government, confer upon any person who holds or has held any post under the Government, all or any of the powers conferred or conferrable by or under this Sanhita on a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or of the second class, in respect to particular cases or to particular classes of cases, in any local area and such Magistrates shall be called Special Judicial Magistrates. Clause 12 of the Bill relates to Local jurisdiction of Judicial Magistrates. This Clause provides, subject to the control of the High Court, the Chief Judicial Magistrate may, from time to time, define the local limits of the areas. Clause 13 of the Bill relates to Subordination of Judicial Magistrates. This Clause provides Chief Judicial Magistrate shall be subordinate to the Sessions Judge; and every other Judicial Magistrate shall, subject to the general control of the Sessions Judge, be subordinate to the Chief Judicial Magistrate. Clause 14 of the Bill relates to Executive Magistrates. This Clause provides that in every district, the State Government may appoint as many persons as it thinks fit to be Executive Magistrates. Clause 15 of the Bill relates to Special Executive Magistrates. This Clause provides the State Government may appoint, for such term as it may think fit, Executive Magistrates or any police officer not below the rank of Superintendent of Police or equivalent, to be known as Special Executive Magistrates. Clause 16 of the Bill relates to Local Jurisdiction of Executive Magistrates. This Clause provides the District Magistrate may, from time to time, define the local limits of the areas within which the Executive Magistrates may exercise all or any of the powers with which they may be invested. Clause 17 of the Bill relates to Subordination of Executive Magistrates. This Clause provides all Executive Magistrates shall be subordinate to the District Magistrate, and every Executive Magistrate (other than the Sub-divisional Magistrate) exercising powers in a sub-division shall also be subordinate to the Sub-divisional Magistrate, subject, however, to the general control of the District Magistrate. Clause 18 of the Bill relates to Public Prosecutors. This Clause provides for every High Court, the Central Government or the State Government shall, after consultation with the High Court, appoint a Public Prosecutor. Clause 19 of the Bill relates to Assistant Public Prosecutors. This Clause provides the Central Government and the State Government shall appoint in every district one or more Assistant Public Prosecutors for conducting prosecutions in the Courts of Magistrates. Clause 20 of the Bill relates to Directorate of Prosecution. This Clause provides the State Government may establish Directorate of Prosecution in the State consisting of a Director of Prosecution and as many Deputy Directors of Prosecution. Clause 21 of the Bill relates to Courts by which offences are triable. This Clause provides any offence may be tried by the High Court, or the Court of Session, or any other Court by which such offence is shown in the First Schedule to be triable. Clause 22 of the Bill relates to Sentences High Courts and Sessions Judges may pass. This Clause provides that High Court may pass any sentence authorised by law. A Sessions Judge or Additional Sessions Judge may pass any sentence authorised by law; but any sentence of death passed by any such Judge shall be subject to confirmation by the High Court. Clause 23 of the Bill relates to sentences which Magistrates may pass. This Clause provides the Judicial Magistrate of the first class may pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, or of fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, or of both. Clause 24 of the Bill relates to sentence of imprisonment in default of fine. This Clause provides the Court of a Judicial Magistrate may award such term of imprisonment in default of payment of fine as is authorised by law subject to certain conditions. Clause 25 of the Bill relates to Sentence in cases of conviction of several offences at one trial. This Clause provides the court shall, considering the gravity of offences, order such punishments to run concurrently or consecutively. Clause 26 of the Bill relates to Mode of conferring powers. This Clause provides the High Court or the State Government, as the case may be, may, by order, empower persons specially by name or in virtue of their offices or classes of officials generally be their official titles. Clause 27 of the Bill relates to Powers of officers appointed. Clause 28 of the Bill relates to Withdrawal of powers. This Clause provides the High Court or the State Government, as the case may be, may withdraw all or any of the powers conferred on any person or by any officer subordinate to it. Clause 29 of the Bill relates to Powers of Judges and Magistrates exercisable by their successors-in-office. This Clause provides the powers and duties of a Judge or Magistrate may be exercised or performed by his successor-in-office. Clause 30 of the Bill relates to Powers of superior officers of police. This Clause provides the Police officers superior in rank to an officer in charge of a police station may exercise the same powers, throughout the local area to which they are appointed, as may be exercised by such officer within the limits of his station. Clause 31 of the Bill relates to Public when to assist Magistrates and police. This Clause provides every person be bound to assist a Magistrate or police officer reasonably demanding his aid for arrest, prevent breach of peace or to prevent damages to public property. Clause 32 of the Bill relates to Aid to person, other than police officer, executing warrant. This Clause provides a warrant be directed to a person other than a police officer, any other person may aid in the execution of such warrant, if the person to whom the warrant is directed were near at hand and acting in the execution of the warrant. Clause 33 of the Bill relates to Public to give information of certain offences. Clause 34 of the Bill relates to Duty of officers employed in connection with the affairs of a village to make certain report. This Clause provides every officer employed in connection with the affairs of a village and every person residing in a village shall forthwith communicate to the nearest Magistrate or to the officer in charge of the nearest police station with regards to commission of certain offences. Clause 35 of the Bill relates to circumstances leads to arrest without warrant by the police. This Clause provide any police officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person commits a cognizable offence and other certain circumstances. Clause 36 of the Bill relates to Procedure of arrest and duties of officer making arrest. Clause 37 of the Bill relates to Designated Police Officer. This Clause provides the State shall establish a Police control room in every district and at State level and designate a police officer. Clause 38 of the Bill relates to Right of arrested person to meet an advocate of his choice during interrogation. This Clause provides arrested person, interrogated by the police, he shall be entitled to meet an advocate of his choice during interrogation, though not throughout interrogation. Clause 39 of the Bill relates to arrest on refusal to give name and residence. This Clause provides any person who, in the presence of a police officer, has committed or has been accused of committing a non-cognizable offence refuses on demand of such officer to give his name and residence or gives a name or residence which such officer has reason to believe to be false, he may be arrested by such officer in order that his name or residence may be ascertained. Clause 40 of the Bill relates to arrest by private person and procedure on such arrest. This Clause provides any private person may arrest or cause to be arrested any person who in his presence commits a non-bailable and cognizable offence, or any proclaimed offender. Clause 41 of the Bill relates to arrest by Magistrate. This Clause provides any offence is committed in the presence of a Magistrate, whether Executive or Judicial, within his local jurisdiction, he may himself arrest or order any person to arrest the offender, and may thereupon, subject to the provisions herein contained as to bail, commit the offender to custody. Clause 42 of the Bill relates to Protection of members of the Armed Forces from arrest. This Clause provides, no member of the Armed Forces shall be arrested for anything done or purported to be done by him in the discharge of his official duties except after obtaining the consent of the Central Government. Clause 43 of the Bill relates to arrest how made. This Clause explains about the arrest by the police officer or other person making the same shall actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission to the custody by word or action with certain exceptions to arrest of woman. Clause 44 of the Bill relates to search of place entered by person sought to be arrested. Clause 45 of the Bill relates to pursuit of offenders into other jurisdictions. This Clause provides police officer may, for the purpose of arresting without warrant any person whom he is authorised to arrest, pursue such person into any place in India. Clause 46 of the Bill relates to unnecessary restraint against arrested person. This Clause provides person arrested shall not be subjected to more restraint than is necessary to prevent his escape. Clause 47 of the Bill relates to Person arrested to be informed of grounds of arrest and of right to bail. This Clause provides every police officer or other person arresting any person without warrant shall forthwith communicate to him full particulars of the offence for which he is arrested or other grounds for such arrest. Clause 48 of the Bill relates to Obligation of person making arrest to inform about the arrest, etc., to relative or friend. This Clause provides every police officer or other person making any arrest under this Sanhita shall forthwith give the information regarding such arrest and place where the arrested person is being held to any of his relatives, friends or such other persons as may be disclosed or mentioned by the arrested person for the purpose of giving such information and also to the designated police officer in the district. Clause 49 of the Bill relates to search of arrested person. This Clause provides the police officer to whom he makes over the person arrested, may search such person, and place in safe custody all articles, other than necessary wearing and with a direction female shall be searched by female. Clause 50 of the Bill relates to power to seize offensive weapons. Clause 51 of the Bill relates to Examination of accused by medical practitioner at the request of police officer. This Clause provides the police officer or other person making any arrest, take from the person arrested any offensive weapons which he has about his person, and shall deliver all weapons so taken to the Court or officer before which or whom the officer or person making the arrest is required by this Sanhita to produce the person arrested. Clause 52 of the Bill relates to Examination of person accused of rape by medical practitioner. Clause 53 of the Bill relates to Examination of arrested person by medical officer. This Clause provides any person is arrested, he shall be examined by a medical officer in the service of the Central Government or a State Government, and in case the medical officer is not available, by a registered medical practitioner soon after the arrest is made and subject to certain exceptions. Clause 54 of the Bill relates to Identification of person arrested. This Clause provides a person arrested on a charge of committing an offence and his identification by any other person or persons is considered necessary for the purpose of investigation of such offence, the Court, having jurisdiction may, on the request of the officer in charge of a police station, direct the person so arrested to subject himself to identification by any person or persons in such manner as the Court may deem fit, subject to certain exceptions. Clause 55 of the Bill relates to Procedure when police officer deputes subordinate to arrest without warrant. Clause 56 of the Bill relates to health and safety of arrested person. This Clause provides the duty of the person having the custody of an accused to take reasonable care of the health and safety of the accused. Clause 57 of the Bill relates to Person arrested to be taken before Magistrate or officer in charge of police station. This Clause provides police officer making an arrest without warrant shall, without unnecessary delay and subject to the provisions herein contained as to bail, take or send the person arrested before a Judicial Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, or before the officer in charge of a police station. Clause 58 of the Bill relates to Person arrested not to be detained more than twenty- four hours. This Clause clarifies no police officer shall detain in custody a person arrested without warrant for a longer period than under all the circumstances of the case is reasonable, and such period shall not, in the absence of a special order of a Magistrate, exceed twenty-four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate's Court, whether having jurisdiction or not. Clause 59 of the Bill relates to Police to report apprehensions. This Clause provides Officers in charge of police stations shall report to the District Magistrate, or, if he so directs, to the Sub-divisional Magistrate, the cases of all persons arrested without warrant, within the limits of their respective stations, whether such persons have been admitted to bail or otherwise. Clause 60 of the Bill relates to Discharge of person apprehended. This Clause provides that no person who has been arrested by a police officer shall be discharged except on his own bond, or on bail, or under the special order of a Magistrate. Clause 61 of the Bill relates to Power, on escape, to pursue and retake. This Clause provides a person in lawful custody escapes or is rescued, the person from whose custody he escaped or was rescued may immediately pursue and arrest him in any place in India. Clause 62 of the Bill relates to Arrest to be made strictly according to the Sanhita. This Clause provides that no arrest shall be made except in accordance with the provisions of this Sanhita or any other law for the time being in force providing for arrest. Clause 63 of the Bill relates to Form of summons. This Clause provides every summons issued by a Court shall be in writing, in duplicate, signed by the presiding officer of such Court or by such other officer as the High Court may, from time to time, by rule direct, and shall bear the seal of the Court; or in an encrypted or any other form of electronic communication and shall bear the image of the seal of the Court. Clause 64 of the Bill relates to service of summons. Clause 65 of the Bill relates to service of summons on corporate bodies, firms, and societies. This Clause provides service of a summons on a company or corporation may be effected by serving it on the Director, Manager, Secretary or other officer of the company or corporation, or by letter sent by registered post addressed to the Director, Manager, Secretary or other officer of the company or corporation in India, in which case the service shall be deemed to have been effected when the letter would arrive in ordinary course of post. Clause 66 of the Bill relates to Service when persons summoned cannot be found. This Clause provides the person summoned cannot, by the exercise of due diligence, be found, the summons may be served by leaving one of the duplicates for him with some adult member of his family residing with him, and the person with whom the summons is so left shall, if so required by the serving officer, sign a receipt therefor on the back of the other duplicate. Clause 67 of the Bill relates to Procedure when service cannot be effected as before provided. Clause 68 of the Bill relates to Service on Government servant. This Clause provides the person summoned is in the active service of the Government, the Court issuing the summons shall ordinarily send it in duplicate to the head of the office in which such person is employed; and such head shall thereupon cause the summons to be served in the manner provided by section 64, and shall return it to the Court under his signature with the endorsement required by that section. Clause 69 of the Bill relates to Service of summons outside local limits. This Clause provides when a Court desires that a summons issued shall be served at any place outside its local jurisdiction, it shall ordinarily send such summons in duplicate to a Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the person summoned resides, or is, to be there served. Clause 70 of the Bill relates to Proof of service in such cases and when serving officer not present. Clause 71 of the Bill relates to Service of summons on witness by post. This Clause provides that a Court issuing a summons to a witness may, in addition to and simultaneously with the issue of such summons, direct a copy of the summons to be served by electronic communication or by registered post addressed to the witness at the place where he ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain. Clause 72 of the Bill relates to Form of warrant of arrest and duration. This Clause provides every warrant of arrest issued by a Court under this Sanhita shall be in writing, signed by the presiding officer of such Court and shall bear the seal of the Court and further the warrant shall remain in force until it is cancelled by the Court which issued. Clause 73 of the Bill relates to Power to direct security to be taken. Clause 74 of the Bill relates to Warrants to whom directed. This Clause provides that a warrant of arrest shall ordinarily be directed to one or more police officers; but the Court issuing such a warrant may, if its immediate execution is necessary and no police officer is immediately available, direct it to any other person or persons, and such person or persons shall execute the same. Clause 75 of the Bill relates to Warrant may be directed to any person. This Clause provides the Chief Judicial Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class may direct a warrant to any person within his local jurisdiction for the arrest of any escaped convict, proclaimed offender or of any person who is accused of a non-bailable offence and is evading arrest. Clause 76 of the Bill relates to Warrant directed to police officer. This Clause provides a warrant directed to any police officer may also be executed by any other police officer whose name is endorsed upon the warrant by the officer to whom it is directed or endorsed. Clause 77 of the Bill relates to Notification of substance of warrant. This Clause provides the police officer or other person executing a warrant of arrest shall notify the substance thereof to the person to be arrested, and, if so required, shall show him the warrant. Clause 78 of the Bill relates to Person arrested to be brought before Court without delay. This Clause provides the police officer or other person executing a warrant of arrest shall without unnecessary delay bring the person arrested before the Court before which he is required by law to produce such person with certain exceptions. Clause 79 of the Bill relates to Where warrant may be executed. This Clause provides a warrant of arrest may be executed at any place in India. Clause 80 of the Bill relates to Warrant forwarded for execution outside jurisdiction. Clause 81 of the Bill relates to Warrant directed to police officer for execution outside jurisdiction. This Clause provides that a warrant directed to a police officer is to be executed beyond the local jurisdiction of the Court issuing the same, he shall ordinarily take it for endorsement either to an Executive Magistrate or to a police officer not below the rank of an officer in charge of a police station, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the warrant is to be executed. Clause 82 of the Bill relates to Procedure on arrest of person against whom warrant issued. Clause 83 of the Bill relates to Procedure by Magistrate before whom such person arrested is brought. This Clause provides the Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent of Police or Commissioner of Police shall, if the person arrested appears to be the person intended by the Court which issued the warrant, direct his removal in custody to such Court with certain exceptions. Clause 84 of the Bill relates to Proclamation for person absconding. This Clause provides any Court has reason to believe (whether after taking evidence or not) that any person against whom a warrant has been issued by it has absconded or is concealing himself so that such warrant cannot be executed, such Court may publish a written proclamation requiring him to appear at a specified place and at a specified time not less than thirty days from the date of publishing such proclamation. Clause 85 of the Bill relates to Attachment of property of person absconding. This Clause provides the Court issuing a proclamation, at any time after the issue of the proclamation, order the attachment of any property, movable or immovable, or both, belonging to the proclaimed person. Clause 86 of the Bill relates to Identification and attachment of property of proclaimed person. This Clause provides the Court may, on the written request from a police officer not below the rank of the Superintendent of Police or Commissioner of Police, initiate the process of requesting assistance from a Court or an authority in the contracting State for identification, attachment and forfeiture of property belonging to a proclaimed person. Clause 87 of the Bill relates to claims and objections to attachment. Clause 88 of the Bill relates to Release, sale and restoration of attached property. This Clause provides that the proclaimed person appears within the time specified in the proclamation, the Court shall make an order releasing the property from the attachment. Clause 89 of the Bill relates to Appeal from order rejecting application for restoration of attached property. This Clause provides any person aggrieved by any refusal to deliver property or the proceeds of the sale thereof may appeal to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the sentences of the first-mentioned Court. Clause 90 of the Bill relates to Issue of warrant in lieu of, or in addition to, summons. This Clause provide a Court may issue a summons for the appearance of any person, issue, after recording its reasons in writing, a warrant for his arrest. Clause 91of the Bill relates to Power to take bond for appearance. This Clause provides any person for whose appearance or arrest the officer presiding in any Court is empowered to issue a summons or warrant, is present in such Court, such officer may require such person to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for his appearance in such Court, or any other Court to which the case may be transferred for trial. Clause 92 of the Bill relates to Arrest on breach of bond for appearance. This Clause provides any person who is bound by any bond taken to appear before a Court, does not appear, the officer presiding in such Court may issue a warrant directing that such person be arrested and produced before him. Clause 93 of the Bill relates to Provisions generally applicable to summonses and warrants of arrest. Clause 94 of the Bill relates to Summons to produce document or other thing. Clause 95 of the Bill relates to Procedure as to documents, parcel or thing in custody of postal authority. This Clause provides any document, parcel or thing in the custody of a postal authority is, in the opinion of the District Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court of Session or High Court wanted for the purpose of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding , such Magistrate or Court may require the postal authority to deliver the document, parcel or thing to such person as the Magistrate or Court directs. Clause 96 of the Bill relates to issuing of search-warrant. Clause 97 of the Bill relates to Search of place suspected to contain stolen property, forged documents, etc. Clause 98 of the Bill relates to Power to declare certain publications forfeited and to issue search-warrants for the same. Clause 99 of the Bill relates to Application to High Court to set aside declaration of forfeiture. Clause 100 of the Bill relates to Search for persons wrongfully confined. This Clause provides any District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class has reason to believe that any person is confined under such circumstances that the confinement amounts to an offence, he may issue a search-warrant, and the person to whom such warrant is directed may search for the person so confined; and such search shall be made in accordance therewith, and the person, if found, shall be immediately taken before a Magistrate, who shall make such order as in the circumstances of the case seems proper. Clause 101 of the Bill relates to Power to compel restoration of abducted females. This Clause affords complaint made on oath of the abduction or unlawful detention of a woman, or a female child under the age of eighteen years for any unlawful purpose, a District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class may make an order for the immediate restoration of such woman to her liberty, or of such female child to her husband, parent, guardian or other person having the lawful charge of such child, and may compel compliance with such order, using such force as may be necessary. Clause 102 of the Bill relates to Directions for search-warrants. Clause 103 of the Bill relates to Persons in charge of closed place to allow search. Clause 104 of the Bill relates to Disposal of things found in search beyond jurisdiction. Clause 105 of the Bill relates to Recording of search and seizure through audio-video electronic means. This Clause seeks to provide the process of conducting search of a place or taking possession of any property, article or thing, including preparation of the list of all things seized in the course of such search and seizure and signing of such list by witnesses, shall be recorded through any audio-video electronic means preferably cell phone and the police officer shall without delay forward such recording to the concern authority. Clause 106 of the Bill relates to Power of police officer to seize certain property. This Clause seeks to provide any police officer may seize any property which may be alleged or suspected to have been stolen, or which may be found under circumstances which create suspicion of the commission of any offence. Clause 107 of the Bill relates to Attachment. Clause 108 of the Bill relates to Magistrate may direct search in his presence. This Clause seeks to provide any Magistrate may direct a search to be made in his presence of any place for the search of which he is competent to issue a search-warrant., forfeiture or restoration of property. Clause 109 of the Bill relates to Power to impound document or thing produced before Court. This Clause seeks to provide any Court may impound any document or thing produced before it. Clause 110 of the Bill relates to Reciprocal arrangements regarding processes. Clause 111 of the Bill relates to Definitions. This Clause relates to certain definitions in respect of Chapter VIII of the Reciprocal arrangements for assistance in certain matters and procedure for attachment and forfeiture of property outside India. Clause 112 of the Bill relates to Letter of request to competent authority for investigation in a country or place outside India. Clause 113 of the Bill relates to Letter of request from a country or place outside India to a Court or an authority for investigation in India. This Clause seeks to provide, upon receipt of a letter of request from a Court or an authority in a country or place outside India competent to issue such letter in that country or place for the examination of any person or production of any document or thing in relation to an offence under investigation in that country or place, the Central Government may forward the same to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate as he may appoint in this behalf, who shall thereupon summon the person before him and record his statement or cause the document or thing to be produced; or send the letter to any police officer for investigation, who shall thereupon investigate into the offence in the same manner, as if the offence had been committed within India. Clause 114 of the Bill relates to Assistance in securing transfer of persons. This Clause seeks to provide, a Court in India, in relation to a criminal matter, desires that a warrant for arrest of any person to attend or produce a document or other thing issued by it shall be executed in any place in a contracting State, it shall send such warrant in duplicate in such form to such Court, Judge or Magistrate through such authority, as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf and that Court, Judge or Magistrate, as the case may be, shall cause the same to be executed. Clause 115 of the Bill relates to Assistance in relation to orders of attachment or forfeiture of property. This Clause seeks to provide, the Court in India has reasonable grounds to believe that any property obtained by any person is derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, by such person from the commission of an offence, it may make an order of attachment or forfeiture of such property. Clause 116 of the Bill relates to Identifying unlawfully acquired property. This Clause seeks to provide that the Court shall, on receipt of a letter of request, direct any police officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector of Police to take all steps necessary for tracing and identifying such property include any inquiry, investigation or survey in respect of any person, place, property, assets, documents, books of account in any bank or public financial institutions or any other relevant matters. Clause 117 of the Bill relates to Seizure or attachment of property. This Clause seeks to provide that any officer conducting an inquiry or investigation under section 116 has a reason to believe that any property in relation to which such inquiry or investigation is being conducted is likely to be concealed transferred or dealt with in any manner which will result in disposal of such property, he may make an order for seizing such property and where it is not practicable to seize such property, he may make an order of attachment directing that such property shall not be transferred or otherwise dealt with, except with the prior permission of the officer making such order, and a copy of such order shall be served on the person concerned. Clause 118 of the Bill relates to Management of properties seized or forfeited under this Chapter. This Clause seeks to provide that the Court may appoint the District Magistrate of the area where the property is situated, or any other officer that may be nominated by the District Magistrate, to perform the functions of an Administrator of such property. Clause 119 of the Bill relates to Notice of forfeiture of property. Clause 120 of the Bill relates to Forfeiture of property in certain cases. This Clause seeks to provide that the Court may, after considering the explanation, if any, to the show-cause notice issued and the material available before it and after giving to the person affected and a reasonable opportunity of being heard, by order, record a finding whether all or any of the properties in question are proceeds of crime with certain exceptions. Clause 121 of the Bill relates to Fine in lieu of forfeiture. This Clause seeks to provide that the Court makes a declaration that any property stands forfeited to the Central Government and it is a case where the source of only a part of such property has not been proved to the satisfaction of the Court, it shall make an order giving an option to the person affected to pay, in lieu of forfeiture, a fine equal to the market value of such part. Clause 122 of the Bill relates to Certain transfers to be null and void. This Clause seeks to provide after the making of an order under sub-section (1) of section 117 or the issue of a notice under section 119, any property referred to in the said order or notice is transferred by any mode whatsoever such transfers shall, for the purposes of the proceedings under this Chapter, be ignored and if such property is subsequently forfeited to the Central Government under section 120, then, the transfer of such property shall be deemed to be null and void. Clause 123 of the Bill relates to Procedure in respect of letter of request. This Clause seeks to provide every letter of request, summons or warrant, received by the Central Government from, and every letter of request, summons or warrant, to be transmitted to a contracting State under this Chapter shall be transmitted to a contracting State or, as the case may be, sent to the concerned Court in India in such form and in such manner as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf. Clause 124 of the Bill relates to power of the Central Government to issue notification with regards to the application of Chapter VIII with the contracting State. This Clause seeks to provide the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the application of this Chapter in relation to a contracting State with which reciprocal arrangements have been made, shall be subject to such conditions, exceptions or qualifications as are specified in the said notification. Clause 125 of the Bill relates to Security for keeping the peace on conviction. This Clause seeks to provide a Court of Session or Court of a Magistrate of the first class convicts a person of any of the offences or of abetting and is of opinion that it is necessary to take security from such person for keeping the peace, the Court may, at the time of passing sentence on such person, order him to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for keeping the peace for such period, not exceeding three years. Clause 126 of the Bill relates to Security for keeping the peace in other cases. This Clause seeks to provide an Executive Magistrate receives information that any person is likely to commit a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquility or to do any wrongful act that may probably occasion a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquility and is of opinion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding, he may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond with or without sureties, for keeping the peace for such period, not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit. Clause 127 of the Bill relates to Security for good behaviour from persons disseminating seditious matters. Clause 128 of the Bill relates to Security for good behaviour from suspected persons. This Clause seeks to provide an Executive Magistrate receives information that there is within his local jurisdiction a person taking precautions to conceal his presence and that there is reason to believe that he is doing so with a view to committing a cognizable offence, the Magistrate may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for his good behaviour for such period, not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit. Clause 129 of the Bill relates to Security for good behaviour from habitual offenders. This Clause seeks to provide an Executive Magistrate receives information that there is within his local jurisdiction a person who is a habitual offender, require such person to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond, with sureties, for his good behaviour for such period, not exceeding three years, as the Magistrate thinks fit. Clause 130 of the Bill relates to Order to be made. This Clause seeks to provide a Magistrate require any person to show cause under such section, shall make an order in writing, setting forth the substance of the information received, the amount of the bond to be executed, the term for which it is to be in force and the number of sureties, after considering the fitness for payment of sureties. Clause 131 of the Bill relates to Procedure in respect of person present in Court. This Clause seeks to provide the person in respect of whom such order is made is present in Court, it shall be read over to him, or, if he so desires, the substance thereof shall be explained to him. Clause 132 of the Bill relates to Summons or warrant in case of person not so present. This Clause seeks to provide, when a person is not present in Court, the Magistrate shall issue a summons requiring him to appear, or, when such person is in custody, a warrant directing the officer in whose custody he is to bring him before the Court with certain exceptions. Clause 133 of the Bill relates to Copy of order to accompany summons or warrant. This Clause seeks to provide every summons or a copy of the order shall accompany warrant issued under Clause 132 and the officer serving shall deliver such copy or executing such summons or warrant to the person served with, or arrested under, the same. Clause 134 of the Bill relates to Power to dispense with personal attendance. This Clause seeks to provide the Magistrate may, if he sees sufficient cause, dispense with the personal attendance of any person called upon to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond for keeping the peace or for good behaviour and may permit him to appear by a pleader. Clause 135 of the Bill relates to Inquiry as to truth of information. This Clause seeks to provide the Magistrate shall proceed to inquire into the truth of the information upon which action has been taken, and to take such further evidence as may appear necessary. Clause 136 of the Bill relates to Order to give security. This Clause seeks to provide that, it is necessary for keeping the peace or maintaining good behaviour, as the case may be, that the person in respect of whom the inquiry is made should execute a bond, with or without sureties, the Magistrate shall make an order accordingly. Clause 137 of the Bill relates to Discharge of person informed against. This Clause seeks to provide, on an inquiry, it is not proved that it is necessary for keeping the peace or maintaining good behaviour, as the case may be, that the person in respect of whom the inquiry is made, should execute a bond, the Magistrate shall make an entry on the record to that effect, and if such person is in custody only for the purposes of the inquiry, shall release him, or, if such person is not in custody, shall discharge him. Clause 138 of the Bill relates to Commencement of period for which security is required. Clause 139 of the Bill relates to Contents of bond. This Clause seeks to provide that the bond to be executed by any such person shall bind him to keep the peace or to be of good behaviour, as the case may be, and in the latter case the commission or attempt to commit, or the abetment of, any offence punishable with imprisonment, wherever it may be committed, is a breach of the bond. Clause 140 of the Bill relates to Power to reject sureties. This Clause seeks to provide that the Magistrate may refuse to accept any surety offered, or may reject any surety previously accepted by him or his predecessor under this Chapter on the ground that such surety is an unfit person for the purposes of the bond with certain exceptions. Clause 141 of the Bill relates to Imprisonment in default of security. This Clause seeks to provide that any person ordered to give security , does not give such security on or before the date on which the period for which such security is to be given commences, he shall, except in the case next hereinafter mentioned, be committed to prison, or, if he is already in prison, be detained in prison until such period expires or until within such period he gives the security to the Court or Magistrate who made the order requiring it. Clause 142 of the Bill relates toPower to release persons imprisoned for failing to give security. Clause 143 of the Bill relates toSecurity for unexpired period of bond. This Clause seeks to provide that a person for whose appearance a summons or warrant has been issued, appears or is brought before the Magistrate or Court, the Magistrate or Court shall cancel the bond executed by such person and shall order such person to give, for the unexpired portion of the term of such bond, fresh security of the same description as the original security. Clause 144 of the Bill relates to Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents. This Clause seeks to provide that any person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain his wife, unable to maintain herself, or his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether married or not, unable to maintain itself, or his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married daughter) who has attained majority, where such child is, by reason of any physical or mental abnormality or injury unable to maintain itself, or his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself, a Judicial Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother, at such monthly rate as such Magistrate thinks fit and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct with certain exceptions. Clause 145 of the Bill relates to jurisdiction of filing application under section 144 and procedures for recording the evidence. This Clause seeks to fix the jurisdiction for making application, any person in any district where he is, or where he or his wife resides, or where he last resided with his wife, or as the case may be, with the mother of the illegitimate child. Clause 146 of the Bill relates toAlteration in allowance. This Clause seeks to provide that on proof of a change in the circumstances of any person, a monthly allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance, or ordered under the same section to pay a monthly allowance for the maintenance, or interim maintenance, to his wife, child, father or mother, as the case may be, the Magistrate may make such alteration, as he thinks fit, in the allowance for the maintenance or the interim maintenance. Clause 147 of the Bill relates toEnforcement of order of maintenance. This Clause seeks to provide that a copy of the order of maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of proceedings, as the case may be, shall be given without payment to the person in whose favour it is made, or to his guardian, if any, or to the person to whom the allowance for the maintenance or the allowance for the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be, is to be paid; and such order may be enforced by any Judicial Magistrate in any place where the person against whom it is made may be, on such Magistrate being satisfied as to the identity of the parties and the non-payment of the allowance, or as the case may be, expenses, due. Clause 148 of the Bill relates to Dispersal of assembly by use of civil force. This Clause seeks to provide that the Executive Magistrate or officer in charge of a police station or, in the absence of such officer in charge, any police officer, not below the rank of a sub-inspector, may command any unlawful assembly, or any assembly of five or more persons likely to cause a disturbance of the public peace, to disperse; and it shall thereupon be the duty of the members of such assembly to disperse accordingly. Clause 149 of the Bill relates toUse of armed forces to disperse assembly. This Clause seeks to provide thatany assembly cannot otherwise be dispersed, and it is necessary for the public security that it should be dispersed, the District Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate authorised by him, who is present, may cause it to be dispersed by the armed forces. Clause 150 of the Bill relates to Power of certain armed force officers to disperse assembly. This Clause seeks to provide thatthe public security is manifestly endangered by any such assembly and no Executive Magistrate can be communicated with, any commissioned or Gazetted Officer of the armed forces may disperse such assembly with the help of the armed forces under his command, and may arrest and confine any persons forming part of it, in order to disperse such assembly or that they may be punished according to law; but if, while he is acting under this section, it becomes practicable for him to communicate with an Executive Magistrate, he shall do so, and shall thenceforward obey the instructions of the Magistrate, as to whether he shall or shall not continue such action. Clause 151 of the Bill relates to Protection against prosecution for acts done under sections 148, 149 and 150. This Clause seeks to provide no prosecution against any person for any act purporting to be done under section 148, section 149 or section 150 shall be instituted in any Criminal Court except with the sanction of the Central Government where such person is an officer or member of the armed forces or the State Government in any other case; Clause 152 of the Bill relates to Conditional order for removal of nuisance. Clause 153 of the Bill relates to the service or notification of order against the removal of nuisance. Clause 154 of the Bill relates to person against the order is addressed to obey or show cause. Clause 155 of the Bill relates to consequences of failure in compliance with the order for removal of nuisance. Clause 156 of the Bill relates to Procedures to be followed in existence of public right is denied. Clause 157 of the Bill relates to Procedure on appearance to show cause. Clause 158 of the Bill relates to Power of Magistrate to direct local investigation and examination of an expert. Clause 159 of the Bill relates to Power of Magistrate to furnish written instructions, etc. Clause 160 of the Bill relates to Procedure on order being made absolute and consequences of disobedience. Clause 161 of the Bill relates to Injunction to prevent imminent danger or injury during pending inquiry. Clause 162 of the Bill relates to Magistrate may prohibit repetition or continuance of public nuisance. Clause 163 of the Bill relates to Power to issue order in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger. Clause 164 of the Bill relates to Procedure where dispute concerning land or water is likely to cause breach of peace. Clause 165 of the Bill relates to Power to attach subject of dispute and to appoint receiver. Clause 166 of the Bill relates to Dispute concerning right of use of land or water. Clause 167 of the Bill relates to Local inquiry by the District Magistrate. Clause 168 of the Bill relates to power of police to prevent cognizable offences. Clause 169 of the Bill relates to Information of design to commit cognizable offences. Clause 170 of the Bill relates to power of the police to arrest to prevent the commission of cognizable offences. Clause 171 of the Bill relates to Prevention of injury to public property. Clause 172 of the Bill relates to Persons bound to conform to lawful directions of police. Clause173 of the Bill relates to Information in cognizable cases. Clause 174 of the Bill relates to Information as to non-cognizable cases and investigation of such cases. Clause 175 of the Bill relates to power of police officer to investigate cognizable case. Clause 176 of the Bill relates to Procedure for investigation by the police officer upon receipt of information. Clause 177 of the Bill relates to submission of Report to the Magistrate. Clause 178 of the Bill relates to Power to hold investigation or preliminary inquiry. Clause 179 of the Bill relates to Police officer's power to require attendance of witnesses. Clause 180 of the Bill relates to Examination of witnesses by police. Clause 181 of the Bill relates to statements to the police and use thereof. Clause 182 of the Bill relates to no inducement to be offered. Clause 183 of the Bill relates to Recording of confessions and statements. Clause 184 of the Bill relates to Medical examination of the victim of rape. Clause 185 of the Bill relates to Search by police officer. Clause 186 of the Bill relates to search warrant when officer in charge of police station may require another to issue search-warrant. Clause 187 of the Bill relates to Procedure when investigation cannot be completed in twenty-four hours. Clause 188 of the Bill relates to Report of investigation by subordinate police officer. This Clause provides that any subordinate police officer has made any investigation, shall report the result of such investigation to the officer in charge of the police station. Clause 189 of the Bill relates to Release of accused when evidence deficient. Clause 190 of the Bill relates to Cases to be sent to Magistrate, when evidence is sufficient. Clause 191 of the Bill relates to Complainant and witnesses not to be required to accompany police officer and not to be subjected to restraint. Clause 192 of the Bill relates to Diary of proceedings in investigation. Clause 193 of the Bill relates to Report of police officer on completion of investigation. Clause 194 of the Bill relates to Police to enquire and report on suicide, etc. Clause 195 of the Bill relates to Power to summon persons. Clause 196 of the Bill relates to Inquiry by Magistrate into cause of death. Clause 197 of the Bill relates to Ordinary place of inquiry and trial. Clause 198 of the Bill relates to Place of inquiry or trial. Clause 199 of the Bill relates to Offence triable where act is done or consequence ensues. This Clause provides that an act is an offence by reason of anything which has been done and of a consequence which has ensued, the offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction such thing has been done or such consequence has ensued. Clause 200 of the Bill relates to Place of trial where act is an offence by reason of relation to other offence. This Clause provides that an act is an offence by reason of its relation to any other act which is also an offence or which would be an offence if the doer were capable of committing an offence, the first-mentioned offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction either act was done. Clause 201 of the Bill relates to Place of trial in case of certain offences. Clause 202 of the Bill relates to Offences committed by means of electronic communications, letters, etc. Clause 203 of the Bill relates to Offence committed on journey or voyage. Clause 204 of the Bill relates to Place of trial for offences triable together. Clause 205 of the Bill relates to Power to order cases to be tried in different sessions divisions. Clause 206 of the Bill relates to High Court to decide, in case of doubt, district where inquiry or trial shall take place. Clause 207 of the Bill relates to Power to issue summons or warrant for offence committed beyond local jurisdiction. Clause 208 of the Bill relates to Offence committed outside India. Clause 209 of the Bill relates to Receipt of evidence relating to offences committed outside India. Clause 210 of the Bill relates to Cognizance of offences by Magistrates. Clause 211 of the Bill relates toTransfer of criminal cases on application of the accused. Clause 212 of the Bill relates to Making over of cases to Magistrates. Clause 213 of the Bill relates to Cognizance of offences by Courts of Session. This Clause provides that except as otherwise expressly provided by this Sanhita or by any other law for the time being in force, no Court of Session shall take cognizance of any offence as a Court of original jurisdiction unless the case has been committed to it by a Magistrate under this Sanhita. Clause 214 of the Bill relates to Additional Sessions Judges to try cases made over to them. This Clause provides that an Additional Sessions Judge shall try such cases as the Sessions Judge of the division may, by general or special order, make over to him for trial or as the High Court may, by special order, direct him to try. Clause 215 of the Bill relates to Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of public servants, for offences against public justice and for offences relating to documents given in evidence. Clause 216 of the Bill relates to Procedure for witnesses in case of threatening, etc. This Clause provides that witness or any other person may file a complaint in relation to an offence under section 230 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. Clause 217 of the Bill relates to Prosecution for offences against the State and for criminal conspiracy to commit such offence. Clause 218 of the Bill relates to Prosecution of Judges and public servants. Clause 219 of the Bill relates to Prosecution for offences against marriage. Clause 220 of the Bill relates to Prosecution of offences under section 498A of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. Clause 221 of the Bill relates to Cognizance of offence. This Clause provides that No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 67 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 where the persons are in a marital relationship, except upon prima facie satisfaction of the facts which constitute the offence upon a complaint having been filed or made by the wife against the husband. Clause 222 of the Bill relates to Prosecution for defamation. This Clause provides that no Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter XIX of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 except upon a complaint made by some person aggrieved by the offence, subject to certain exceptions. Clause 223 of the Bill relates to Examination of complainant. This Clause provides that a Magistrate having jurisdiction while taking cognizance of an offence on complaint shall examine upon oath the complainant and the witnesses present, if any, and the substance of such examination shall be reduced to writing and shall be signed by the complainant and the witnesses, and also by the Magistrate, subject to certain exceptions. Clause 224 of the Bill relates to Procedure by Magistrate not competent to take cognizance of the case. This Clause provides that the complaint is made to a Magistrate who is not competent to take cognizance of the offence, he shall, return it for presentation to the proper Court with an endorsement to that effect and direct the complainant to the proper Court. Clause 225 of the Bill relates to Postponement of issue of process. Clause 226 of the Bill relates to Dismissal of complaint. This Clause provides that the Magistrate is of opinion that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding, he shall dismiss the complaint, and in every such case he shall briefly record his reasons. Clause 227 of the Bill relates to Issue of process. This Clause provides that the Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence there is sufficient ground for proceeding, and the case appears to be a summons-case, he shall issue summons to the accused for his attendance, or a warrant-case, he may issue a warrant, or, if he thinks fit, a summons, for causing the accused to be brought or to appear at a certain time before such Magistrate or some other Magistrate having jurisdiction. Clause 228 of the Bill relates to Magistrate may dispense with personal attendance of accused. This Clause provides that the Magistrate issues a summons, dispense with the personal attendance of the accused and permit him to appear by his pleader and further at any stage of the proceedings, direct the personal attendance of the accused, and, if necessary, enforce such attendance. Clause 229 of the Bill relates to Special summons in cases of petty offence. This Clause provides that the Magistrate taking cognizance of a petty offence, issue summons to the accused requiring him either to appear in person or by pleader before the Magistrate on a specified date, or if he desires to plead guilty to the charge without appearing before the Magistrate, to transmit before the specified date, by post or by messenger to the Magistrate, the said plea in writing and the amount of fine specified in the summons or if he desires to appear by pleader and to plead guilty to the charge through such pleader, to authorise, in writing, the pleader to plead guilty to the charge on his behalf and to pay the fine through such pleader. Clause 230 of the Bill relates to Supply to the accused of copy of police report and other documents. This Clause provides that the proceeding has been instituted on a police report, the Magistrate shall without delay, and in no case beyond fourteen days from the date of production or appearance of the accused, furnish to the accused and the victim, free of cost. Clause 231 of the Bill relates to supply of copies of statements and documents to accused in other cases triable by Court of Session. This Clause provides when a case instituted otherwise than on a police report, it appears to the Magistrate issuing process under Clause 227 that the offence is triable exclusively by the Court of Session, the Magistrate shall forthwith furnish to the accused, free of cost. Clause 232 of the Bill relates to Commitment of case to Court of Session when offence is triable exclusively by it. This Clause provides when a case instituted on a police report or otherwise, the accused appears or is brought before the Magistrate and it appears to the Magistrate that the offence is triable exclusively by the Court of Session, commit, after complying with the provisions of Clause 230or Clause 231. Clause 233 of the Bill relates to Procedure to be followed when there is a complaint case and police investigation in respect of the same offence. Clause 234 of the Bill relates to Contents of charge. Clause 235 of the Bill relates to Particulars as to time, place and person. Clause 236 of the Bill relates to When manner of committing offence must be stated. This Clause provides that the nature of the case is such that the particulars mentioned in clauses 234 and 235 do not give the accused sufficient notice of the matter with which he is charged, the charge shall also contain such particulars of the manner in which the alleged offence was committed as will be sufficient for that purpose. Clause 237 of the Bill relates to words in charge taken in sense of law under which offence is punishable. This Clause provides that in every charge words used in describing an offence shall be deemed to have been used in the sense attached to them respectively by the law under which such offence is punishable. Clause 238 of the Bill relates to Effect of errors. This Clause provides that no error in stating either the offence or the particulars required to be stated in the charge, and no omission to state the offence or those particulars, shall be regarded at any stage of the case as material, unless the accused was in fact misled by such error or omission, and it has occasioned a failure of justice. Clause 239 of the Bill relates to Court may alter charge. Clause 240 of the Bill relates to Recall of witnesses when charge altered. This Clause provides that Whenever a charge is altered or added to by the Court after the commencement of the trial, the prosecutor and the accused shall be allowed to recall or re-summon, and examine with reference to such alteration or addition, any witness who may have been examined, unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers that the prosecutor or the accused, as the case may be, desires to recall or re-examine such witness for the purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating the ends of justice and also to call any further witness whom the Court may think to be material. Clause 241 of the Bill relates to Separate charges for distinct offences. This Clause provides for every distinct offence of which any person is accused there shall be a separate charge, and every such charge shall be tried separately, subject to certain conditions. Clause 242 of the Bill relates to Offences of same kind within year may be charged together. This Clause provides that a person is accused of more offences than one of the same kind committed within the space of twelve months from the first to the last of such offences, whether in respect of the same person or not, he may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, any number of them not exceeding five and Offences are of the same kind when they are punishable with the same amount of punishment under the same section of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or of any special or local law, subject to certain conditions. Clause 243 of the Bill relates to Trial for more than one offence. Clause 244 of the Bill relates to Where it is doubtful what offence has been committed. This Clause deals with a single act or series of acts is of such a nature that it is doubtful which of several offences the facts which can be proved will constitute, the accused may be charged with having committed all or any of such offences, and any number of such charges may be tried at once; or he may be charged in the alternative with having committed some one of the said offences. Clause 245 of the Bill relates to When offence proved included in offence charged. Clause 246 of the Bill relates to What persons may be charged jointly. Clause 247 of the Bill relates to Withdrawal of remaining charges on conviction on one of several charges. This Clause provides that a charge containing more heads than one is framed against the same person, and when a conviction has been had on one or more of them, the complainant, or the officer conducting the prosecution, may, with the consent of the Court, withdraw the remaining charge or charges, or the Court of its own accord may stay the inquiry into, or trial of, such charge or charges and such withdrawal shall have the effect of an acquittal on such charge or charges, unless the conviction be set aside, in which case the said Court (subject to the order of the Court setting aside the conviction) may proceed with the inquiry into, or trial of, the charge or charges so withdrawn. Clause 248 of the Bill relates toT rial to be conducted by Public Prosecutor. This Clause provides that every trial before a Court of Session, the prosecution shall be conducted by a Public Prosecutor. Clause 249 of the Bill relates to Opening case for prosecution. This Clause provides that the accused appears or is brought before the Court, in pursuance of a commitment of the case under Clause 232, or under any other law for the time being in force, the prosecutor shall open his case by describing the charge brought against the accused and stating by what evidence he proposes to prove the guilt of the accused. Clause 250 of the Bill relates to Discharge. This Clause provides that the accused may prefer an application for discharge within a period of sixty days from the date committal under Clause 232 and if, upon consideration of the record of the case and the documents submitted therewith, and after hearing the submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this behalf, the Judge considers that there is not sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, he shall discharge the accused and record his reasons for so doing. Clause 251 of the Bill relates to Framing of charge. Clause 252 of the Bill relates to Conviction on plea of guilty. This Clause provides that the accused pleads guilty, the Judge shall record the plea and may, in his discretion, convict him thereon. Clause 253 of the Bill relates to Date for prosecution evidence. This Clause provides that the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead, or claims to be tried or is not convicted under Clause 252, the Judge shall fix a date for the examination of witnesses, and may, on the application of the prosecution, issue any process for compelling the attendance of any witness or the production of any document or other thing. Clause 254 of the Bill relates to Evidence for prosecution. Clause 255 of the Bill relates to Acquittal. This Clause provides that after taking the evidence for the prosecution, examining the accused and hearing the prosecution and the defence on the point, the Judge considers that there is no evidence that the accused committed the offence, the Judge shall record an order of acquittal. Clause 256 of the Bill relates to Entering upon defence. Clause 257 of the Bill relates to Arguments. This Clause provides that the examination of the witnesses (if any) for the defence is complete, the prosecutor shall sum up his case and the accused or his pleader shall be entitled to reply, subject to certain conditions. Clause 258 of the Bill relates to Judgment of acquittal or conviction. Clause 259 of the Bill relates to Previous conviction. This Clause provides that a previous conviction is charged under the provisions of sub-section (7) of section 234, and the accused does not admit that he has been previously convicted as alleged in the charge, the Judge may, after he has convicted the said accused under section 252 or section 258, take evidence in respect of the alleged previous conviction, and shall record a finding thereon, subject to certain conditions. Clause 260 of the Bill relates to Procedure in cases instituted under section 223(1). Clause 261 of the Bill relates to Compliance with section 231. Clause 262 of the Bill relates to When accused shall be discharged. Clause 263 of the Bill relates to Framing of charge. This Clause provides that upon such consideration, examination, if any, and hearing, the Magistrate is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence triable under this Chapter, which such Magistrate is competent to try and which, in his opinion, could be adequately punished by him, he shall frame in writing a charge against the accused within a period of sixty days from the date of first hearing on charge. Clause 264 of the Bill relates to Conviction on plea of guilty. This Clause provides that the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea and may, in his discretion, convict him thereon. Clause 265 of the Bill relates to Evidence for prosecution. Clause 266 of the Bill relates to Evidence for defence. Clause 267 of the Bill relates to Evidence for prosecution. Clause 268 of the Bill relates to When accused shall be discharged. Clause 269 of the Bill relates to Procedure where accused is not discharged. Clause 270 of the Bill relates to Evidence for defence. This Clause provides that accused shall then be called upon to enter upon his defence and produce his evidence; and the provisions of section 266 shall apply to the case. Clause 271 of the Bill relates to Acquittal or conviction. Clause 272 of the Bill relates to Absence of complainant. This Clause provides that the proceedings have been instituted upon complaint, and on any day fixed for the hearing of the case, the complainant is absent, and the offence may be lawfully compounded or is not a cognizable offence, the Magistrate may after giving thirty days' time to the complainant to be present, in his discretion, notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, at any time before the charge has been framed, discharge the accused. Clause 273 of the Bill relates to Compensation for accusation without reasonable cause. Clause 274 of the Bill relates to Substance of accusation to be stated. This Clause provides that When in a summons-case the accused appears or is brought before the Magistrate, the particulars of the offence of which he is accused shall be stated to him, and he shall be asked whether he pleads guilty or has any defence to make, but it shall not be necessary to frame a formal charge, subject to certain condition. Clause 275 of the Bill relates to Conviction on plea of guilty. This Clause provides that the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea as nearly as possible in the words used by the accused and may, in his discretion, convict him thereon. Clause 276 of the Bill relates to Conviction on plea of guilty in absence of accused in petty cases. Clause 277 of the Bill relates to Procedure when not convicted. Clause 278 of the Bill relates to Acquittal or conviction. Clause 279 of the Bill relates to Non-appearance or death of complainant. Clause 280 of the Bill relates to Withdrawal of complaint. This Clause provides that a complainant, at any time before a final order is passed in any case under this Chapter, satisfies the Magistrate that there are sufficient grounds for permitting him to withdraw his complaint against the accused, or if there be more than one accused, against all or any of them, the Magistrate may permit him to withdraw the same, and shall thereupon acquit the accused against whom the complaint is so withdrawn. Clause 281 of the Bill relates to Power to stop proceedings in certain cases. This Clause provides that any summons-case instituted otherwise than upon complaint, a Magistrate of the first class or, with the previous sanction of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, any other Judicial Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded by him, stop the proceedings at any stage without pronouncing any judgment and where such stoppage of proceedings is made after the evidence of the principal witnesses has been recorded, pronounce a judgment of acquittal, and in any other case, release the accused, and such release shall have the effect of discharge. Clause 282 of the Bill relates to Power of Court to convert summons-cases into warrant-cases. This Clause provides that the course of the trial of a summons-case relating to an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding six months, it appears to the Magistrate that in the interests of justice, the offence should be tried in accordance with the procedure for the trial of warrant-cases, such Magistrate may proceed to re-hear the case in the manner provided by this Sanhita for the trial of warrant-cases and may re-call any witness who may have been examined. Clause 283 of the Bill relates toPower to try summarily. Clause 284 of the Bill relates to Summary trial by Magistrate of the second class. This Clause provides that the High Court may confer on any Magistrate invested with the powers of a Magistrate of the second class power to try summarily any offence which is punishable only with fine or with imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months with or without fine, and any abetment of or attempt to commit any such offence. Clause 285 of the Bill relates to Procedure for summary trials. This Clause provides that trials under this Chapter XXIII, the procedure specified in this Sanhita for the trial of summons-case shall be followed except as hereinafter mentioned and No sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding three months shall be passed in the case of any conviction under this Chapter. Clause 286 of the Bill relates to Record in summary trials. Clause 287 of the Bill relates to Judgment in cases tried summarily. This Clause provides that every case tried summarily in which the accused does not plead guilty, the Magistrate shall record the substance of the evidence and a judgment containing a brief statement of the reasons for the finding. Clause 288 of the Bill relates to Language of record and judgment. This Clause provides that Every such record and judgment shall be written in the language of the Court and The High Court may authorise any Magistrate empowered to try offences summarily to prepare the aforesaid record or judgment or both by means of an officer appointed in this behalf by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and the record or judgment so prepared shall be signed by such Magistrate. Clause 289 of the Bill relates to Application of the Chapter. Clause 290 of the Bill relates to Application for plea bargaining. Clause 291 of the Bill relates to Guidelines for mutually satisfactory disposition. Clause 292 of the Bill relates to Report of the mutually satisfactory disposition to be submitted before the Court. Clause 293 of the Bill relates to Disposal of the case. Clause 294 of the Bill relates to Judgment of the Court. This Clause provides that the Court shall deliver its judgment in terms of section 293 in the open Court and the same shall be signed by the presiding officer of the Court. Clause 295 of the Bill relates to Finality of the judgment. This Clause provides that the judgment delivered by the Court under this section shall be final and no appeal (except the special leave petition under article 136 and writ petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution) shall lie in any Court against such judgment. Clause 296 of the Bill relates to Power of the Court in plea bargaining. This Clause provides that Court shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Chapter, all the powers vested in respect of bail, trial of offences and other matters relating to the disposal of a case in such Court under this Sanhita. Clause 297 of the Bill relates to Period of detention undergone by the accused to be set off against the sentence of imprisonment. This Clause provides that the provisions of section 469 shall apply, for setting off the period of detention undergone by the accused against the sentence of imprisonment imposed under this Chapter, in the same manner as they apply in respect of the imprisonment under other provisions of this Sanhita. Clause 298 of the Bill relates to Savings. This Clause provides that the provisions of Chapter XXIV shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other provisions of this Sanhita and nothing in such other provisions shall be construed to constrain the meaning of any provision of this Chapter. Clause 299 of the Bill relates to Statements of accused not to be used. This Clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the statements or facts stated by an accused in an application for plea bargaining filed under section 290 shall not be used for any other purpose except for the purpose of this Chapter. Clause 300 of the Bill relates to Non-application of the Chapter. It provides that Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to any juvenile or child as defined in section 2 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015. Clause 301 of the Bill relates to Definitions. This Clause relates to certain definitions in respect of Chapter XXV of the Attendance of persons confined or detained in prisons. Clause 302 of the Bill relates to Power to require attendance of prisoners. Clause 303 of the Bill relates to Power of State Government or Central Government to exclude certain persons from operation of section 302. Clause 304 of the Bill relates to Officer in charge of prison to abstain from carrying out order in certain contingencies. Clause 305 of the Bill relates to Prisoner to be brought to Court in custody. This Clause provides that subject to the provisions of section 304, the officer in charge of the prison shall, upon delivery of an order made under sub-section (1) of section 302 and duly countersigned, where necessary, under sub-section (2) thereof, cause the person named in the order to be taken to the Court in which his attendance is required, so as to be present there at the time mentioned in the order, and shall cause him to be kept in custody in or near the Court until he has been examined or until the Court authorises him to be taken back to the prison in which he was confined or detained. Clause 306 of the Bill relates to Power to issue commission for examination of witness in prison. The provisions of this Chapter shall be without prejudice to the power of the Court to issue, under section 319, a commission for the examination, as a witness, of any person confined or detained in a prison; and the provisions of Part B of Chapter XXVI shall apply in relation to the examination on commission of any such person in the prison as they apply in relation to the examination on commission of any other person. Clause 307 of the Bill relates to Language of Courts. This Clause provides that the State Government may determine what shall be, for purposes of this Sanhita, the language of each Court within the State other than the High Court. Clause 308 of the Bill relates to Evidence to be taken in presence of accused. This Clause provides that except as otherwise expressly provided, all evidence taken in the course of the trial or other proceeding shall be taken in the presence of the accused, or, when his personal attendance is dispensed with, in the presence of his pleader, subject to certain condition. It is also Clause 309 of the Bill relates to Record in summons-cases and inquiries. This Clause provides that all summons-cases tried before a Magistrate, in all inquiries under sections 165 to 168 (both inclusive), and in all proceedings under section 493 otherwise than in the course of a trial, the Magistrate shall, as the examination of each witness proceeds, make a memorandum of the substance of the evidence in the language of the Court, subject to certain condition. Clause 310 of the Bill relates to Record in warrant-cases. Clause 311 of the Bill relates to Record in trial before Court of Session. Clause 312 of the Bill relates to language of record of evidence. Clause 313 of the Bill relates to procedure in regard to such evidence when completed. Clause 314 of the Bill relates to interpretation of evidence to accused or his pleader. Clause 315 of the Bill relates to remarks respecting demeanour of witness. This Clause provides that a presiding Judge or Magistrate has recorded the evidence of a witness, he shall also record such remarks (if any) as he thinks material respecting the demeanour of such witness whilst under examination. Clause 316 of the Bill relates to record of examination of accused. Clause 317 of the Bill relates to interpreter to be bound to interpret truthfully. This Clause provides for the services of an interpreter are required by any Criminal Court for the interpretation of any evidence or statement, he shall be bound to state the true interpretation of such evidence or statement. Clause 318 of the Bill relates to record in High Court. This Clause provides that every High Court may, by general rule, prescribe the manner in which the evidence of witnesses and the examination of the accused shall be taken down in cases coming before it, and such evidence and examination shall be taken down in accordance with such rule. Clause 319 of the Bill relates to when attendance of witness may be dispensed with and commission issued. Clause 320 of the Bill relates to commission to whom to be issued. Clause 321 of the Bill relates to execution of Commissions. This Clause provides that the receipt of the commission, the Chief Judicial Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate as he may appoint in this behalf, shall summon the witness before him or proceed to the place where the witness is, and shall take down his evidence in the same manner, and may for this purpose exercise the same powers, as in trials or warrant- cases under this Sanhita. Clause 322 of the Bill relates to parties may examine witnesses. Clause 323 of the Bill relates to return of commission. Clause 324 of the Bill relates to adjournment of proceeding. This Clause provides that every case in which a commission is issued under section 319, the inquiry, trial or other proceeding may be adjourned for a specified time reasonably sufficient for the execution and return of the commission. Clause 325 of the Bill relates to execution of foreign commissions. Clause 326 of the Bill relates to deposition of medical witness. Clause 327 of the Bill relates to identification report of Magistrate. Clause 328 of the Bill relates to evidence of officers of the Mint. Clause 329 of the Bill relates to reports of certain Government scientific experts. Clause 330 of the Bill relates to no formal proof of certain documents. Clause 331 of the Bill relates to affidavit in proof of conduct of public servants. This Clause provides that any application is made to any Court in the course of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita, and allegations are made therein respecting any public servant, the applicant may give evidence of the facts alleged in the application by affidavit, and the Court may, if it thinks fit, order that evidence relating to such facts be so given. Clause 332 of the Bill relates to evidence of formal character on affidavit. Clause 333 of the Bill relates to authorities before whom affidavits may be sworn. Clause 334 of the Bill relates to previous conviction or acquittal how proved. Clause 335 of the Bill relates to record of evidence in absence of accused. Clause 336 of the Bill relates to evidence of public servants, experts, police officers in certain cases. Clause 337 of the Bill relates to person once convicted or acquitted not to be tried for same offence. Clause 338 of the Bill relates to appearance by Public Prosecutors. Clause 339 of the Bill relates to permission to conduct prosecution. Clause 340 of the Bill relates to right of person against whom proceedings are instituted to be defended. This Clause provides that any person accused of an offence before a Criminal Court, or against whom proceedings are instituted under this Sanhita, may of right be defended by an advocate of his choice. Clause 341 of the Bill relates to legal aid to accused at State expense in certain cases. Clause 342 of the Bill relates to procedure when corporation or registered society is an accused. Clause 343 of the Bill relates to tender of pardon to accomplice. Clause 344 of the Bill relates to power to direct tender of pardon. This Clause provides that at any time after commitment of a case but before judgment is passed, the Court to which the commitment is made may, with a view to obtaining at the trial the evidence of any person supposed to have been directly or indirectly concerned in, or privy to, any such offence, tender a pardon on the same condition to such person. Clause 345 of the Bill relates to trial of person not complying with conditions of pardon. Clause 346 of the Bill relates to power to postpone or adjourn proceedings. Clause 347 of the Bill relates to local inspection. Clause 348 of the Bill relates to power to summon material witness, or examine person present. This Clause provides that any Court may, at any stage of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita, summon any person as a witness, or examine any person in attendance, though not summoned as a witness, or recall and re-examine any person already examined; and the Court shall summon and examine or recall and re-examine any such person if his evidence appears to it to be essential to the just decision of the case. Clause 349 of the Bill relates to power of Magistrate to order person to give specimen signatures or handwriting. This Clause provides that a Magistrate of the first class is satisfied that, for the purposes of any investigation or proceeding under this Sanhita, it is expedient to direct any person, including an accused person, to give specimen signatures or finger impressions or handwriting or voice sample, he may make an order to that effect and in that case the person to whom the order relates shall be produced or shall attend at the time and place specified in such order and shall give his specimen signatures or finger impressions or handwriting or voice sample, subject to certain conditions. Clause 350 of the Bill relates to expenses of complainants and witnesses. This Clause provides that subject to any rules made by the State Government, any Criminal Court may, if it thinks fit, order payment, on the part of the Government, of the reasonable expenses of any complainant or witness attending for the purposes of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding before such Court under this Sanhita. Clause 351 of the Bill relates to power to examine the accused. Clause 352 of the Bill relates to oral arguments and memorandum of arguments. Clause 353 of the Bill relates to accused person to be competent witness. Clause 354 of the Bill relates to no influence to be used to induce disclosure. Clause 355 of the Bill relates to provision for inquiries and trial being held in the absence of accused in certain cases. Clause 356 of the Bill relates to inquiry, trial or judgment in absentia of proclaimed offender. Clause 357 of the Bill relates to procedure where accused does not understand proceedings. This Clause provides that the accused, though not a person with mental illness, cannot be made to understand the proceedings, the Court may proceed with the inquiry or trial; and, in the case of a Court other than a High Court, if such proceedings result in a conviction, the proceedings shall be forwarded to the High Court with a report of the circumstances of the case, and the High Court shall pass thereon such order as it thinks fit. Clause 358 of the Bill relates to power to proceed against other persons appearing to be guilty of offence. Clause 359 of the Bill relates to compounding of offences. Clause 360 of the Bill relates to withdrawal from prosecution. Clause 361 of the Bill relates to procedure in cases which Magistrate cannot dispose of. Clause 362 of the Bill relates to procedure when, after commencement of inquiry or trial, Magistrate finds case should be committed. This Clause provides that in any inquiry into an offence or a trial before a Magistrate, it appears to him at any stage of the proceedings before signing the judgment that the case is one which ought to be tried by the Court of Session, he shall commit it to that Court under the provisions hereinbefore contained and thereupon the provisions of Chapter XX shall apply to the commitment so made. Clause 363 of the Bill relates to trial of persons previously convicted of offences against coinage, stamp-law or property. Clause 364 of the Bill relates to procedure when Magistrate cannot pass sentence sufficiently severe. Clause 365 of the Bill relates to conviction or commitment on evidence partly recorded by one Magistrate and partly by another. Clause 366 of the Bill relates to court to be open. Clause 367 of the Bill relates to procedure in case of accused being person with mental illness. Clause 368 of the Bill relates to procedure in case of person with mental illness tried before Court. Clause 369 of the Bill relates to release of person with mental illness pending investigation or trial. Clause 370 of the Bill relates to resumption of inquiry or trial. Clause 371 of the Bill relates to procedure on accused appearing before Magistrate or Court. Clause 372 of the Bill relates to when accused appears to have been of sound mind. Clause 373 of the Bill relates to judgment of acquittal on ground of mental illness. This Clause provides that any person is acquitted upon the ground that, at the time at which he is alleged to have committed an offence, he was, by reason of mental illness, incapable of knowing the nature of the act alleged as constituting the offence, or that it was wrong or contrary to law, the finding shall state specifically whether he committed the act or not. Clause 374 of the Bill relates to person acquitted on such ground to be detained in safe custody. Clause 375 of the Bill relates to power of State Government to empower officer- in-charge to discharge. Clause 376 of the Bill relates to procedure where prisoner with mental illness is reported capable of making his defence. Clause 377 of the Bill relates to procedure where person with mental illness detained is declared fit to be released. Clause 378 of the Bill relates to delivery of person with mental liabilities to care of relative or friend. Clause 379 of the Bill relates to procedure in cases mentioned in section 215. Clause 380 of the Bill relates to appeal. Clause 381 of the Bill relates to power to order costs. Clause 382 of the Bill relates to procedure of Magistrate taking cognizance. Clause 383 of the Bill relates to summary procedure for trial for giving false evidence. Clause 384 of the Bill relates to procedure in certain cases of contempt. Clause 385 of the Bill relates to procedure where Court considers that case should not be dealt with under section 384. Clause 386 of the Bill relates to when Registrar or Sub-Registrar to be deemed a Civil Court. Clause 387 of the Bill relates to discharge of offender on submission of apology. Clause 388 of the Bill relates to imprisonment or committal of person refusing to answer or produce document. Clause 389 of the Bill relates to summary procedure for punishment for non-attendance by a witness in obedience to summons. Clause 390 of the Bill relates to appeals from convictions under sections 383, 384, 388 and 389. Clause 391 of the Bill relates to certain Judges and Magistrates not to try certain offences when committed before themselves. Clause 392 of the Bill relates to judgment. Clause 393 of the Bill relates to language and contents of judgment. Clause 394 of the Bill relates to order for notifying address of previously convicted offender. Clause 395 of the Bill relates to order to pay compensation. Clause 396 of the Bill relates to victim compensation scheme. Clause 397 of the Bill relates to treatment of victims. Clause 398 of the Bill relates to witness protection scheme. Clause 399 of the Bill relates to compensation to persons groundlessly arrested. Clause 400 of the Bill relates to order to pay costs in non-cognizable cases. Clause 401 of the Bill relates to order to release on probation of good conduct or after admonition. Clause 402 of the Bill relates to special reasons to be recorded in certain cases. Clause 403 of the Bill relates to Court not to alter judgment. Clause 404 of the Bill relates to copy of judgment to be given to the accused and other persons. Clause 405 of the Bill relates to judgment when to be translated. Clause 406 of the Bill relates to Court of Session to send copy of finding and sentence to District Magistrate. Clause 407 of the Bill relates to sentence of death to be submitted by Court of Session for confirmation. Clause 408 of the Bill relates to power to direct further inquiry to be made or additional evidence to be taken. Clause 409 of the Bill relates to power of High Court to confirm sentence or annul conviction. Clause 410 of the Bill relates to confirmation or new sentence to be signed by two Judges. Clause 411 of the Bill relates to procedure in case of difference of opinion. Clause 412 of the Bill relates to procedure in cases submitted to High Court for confirmation. Clause 413 of the Bill relates to no appeal to lie unless otherwise provided. Clause 414 of the Bill relates to appeal from orders requiring security or refusal to accept or rejecting surety for keeping peace or good behaviour. Clause 415 of the Bill relates to appeals from convictions. Clause 416 of the Bill relates to no appeal in certain cases when accused pleads guilty. Clause 417 of the Bill relates to no appeal in petty cases. Clause 418 of the Bill relates to appeal by the State Government against sentence. Clause 419 of the Bill relates to appeal in case of acquittal. Clause 420 of the Bill relates to appeal against conviction by High Court in certain cases. Clause 421 of the Bill relates to special right of appeal in certain cases. Clause 422 of the Bill relates to appeal to Court of Session how heard. Clause 423 of the Bill relates to petition of appeal. Clause 424 of the Bill relates to procedure when appellant in jail. Clause 425 of the Bill relates to summary dismissal of appeal. Clause 426 of the Bill relates to procedure for hearing appeals not dismissed summarily. Clause 427 of the Bill relates to powers of the Appellate Court. Clause 428 of the Bill relates to judgments of Subordinate Appellate Court. Clause 429 of the Bill relates to order of High Court on appeal to be certified to lower Court. Clause 430 of the Bill relates to suspension of sentence pending the appeal; release of appellant on bail. Clause 431 of the Bill relates to arrest of accused in appeal from acquittal. Clause 432 of the Bill relates to appellate Court may take further evidence or direct it to be taken. Clause 433 of the Bill relates to procedure where Judges of Court of Appeal are equally divided. Clause 434 of the Bill relates to finality of judgments and orders on appeal. Clause 435 of the Bill relates to abatement of appeals. Clause 436 of the Bill relates to reference to High Court. Clause 437 of the Bill relates to disposal of case according to decision of High Court. Clause 438 of the Bill relates to calling for records to exercise powers of revision. Clause 439 of the Bill relates to power to order inquiry. Clause 440 of the Bill relates to Sessions Judge's powers of revision. Clause 441 of the Bill relates to power of Additional Sessions Judge. Clause 442 of the Bill relates to High Court's powers of revision. Clause 443 of the Bill relates to power of High Court to withdraw or transfer revision cases. Clause 444 of the Bill relates to option of Court to hear parties. Clause 445 of the Bill relates to statement by Magistrate of grounds of his decision to be considered by High Court. Clause 446 of the Bill relates to High Court's order to be certified to lower Court. Clause 447 of the Bill relates to power of Supreme Court to transfer cases and appeals. Clause 448 of the Bill relates to power of High Court to transfer cases and appeals. Clause 449 of the Bill relates to power of Sessions Judge to transfer cases and appeals. Clause 450 of the Bill relates to withdrawal of cases and appeals by Session Judge. Clause 451 of the Bill relates to withdrawal of cases by Judicial Magistrate. Clause 452 of the Bill relates to making over or withdrawal of cases by Executive Magistrates. Clause 453 of the Bill relates to reasons to be recorded. Clause 454 of the Bill relates to execution of order passed under section 410. Clause 455 of the Bill relates to execution of sentence of death passed by High Court. Clause 456 of the Bill relates to postponement of execution of sentence of death in case of appeal to Supreme Court. Clause 457 of the Bill relates to postponement of capital sentence on pregnant woman. Clause 458 of the Bill relates to power to appoint place of imprisonment. Clause 459 of the Bill relates to execution of sentence of imprisonment. Clause 460 of the Bill relates to direction of warrant for execution. Clause 461 of the Bill relates to warrant with whom to be lodged. Clause 462 of the Bill relates to warrant for levy of fine. Clause 463 of the Bill relates to effect of such warrant. Clause 464 of the Bill relates to warrant for levy of fine issued by a Court in any territory to which this Sanhita does not extend. Clause 465 of the Bill relates to suspension of execution of sentence of imprisonment. Clause 466 of the Bill relates to who may issue warrant. Clause 467 of the Bill relates to sentence on escaped convict when to take effect. Clause 468 of the Bill relates to sentence on offender already sentenced for another offence. Clause 469 of the Bill relates to period of detention undergone by the accused to be set off against the sentence of imprisonment. Clause 470 of the Bill relates to saving. Clause 471 of the Bill relates to return of warrant on execution of sentence. Clause 472 of the Bill relates to money ordered to be paid recoverable as a fine. Clause 473 of the Bill relates to mercy Petition in death sentence cases. Clause 474 of the Bill relates to power to suspend or remit sentences. Clause 475 of the Bill relates to power to commute sentence. Clause 476 of the Bill relates to restriction on powers of remission or commutation in certain cases. Clause 477 of the Bill relates to concurrent power of Central Government in case of death sentences. Clause 478 of the Bill relates to state Government to act after concurrence with Central Government in certain cases. Clause 479 of the Bill relates to bail and bond. Clause 480 of the Bill relates to cases bail to be taken. Clause 481 of the Bill relates to maximum period for which an undertrial prisoner can be detained. Clause 482 of the Bill relates to when bail may be taken in case of non-bailable offence. Clause 483 of the Bill relates to bail to require accused to appear before next appellate Court. Clause 484 of the Bill relates to direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest. Clause 485 of the Bill relates to special powers of High Court or Court of Session regarding bail. Clause 486 of the Bill relates to amount of bond and reduction thereof. Clause 487 of the Bill relates to bond of accused and sureties. Clause 488 of the Bill relates to declaration by sureties. Clause 489 of the Bill relates to discharge from custody. Clause 490 of the Bill relates to power to order sufficient bail when that first taken is insufficient. Clause 491 of the Bill relates to discharge of sureties. Clause 492 of the Bill relates to deposit instead of recognizance. Clause 493 of the Bill relates to procedure when bond has been forfeited. Clause 494 of the Bill relates to cancellation of bond and bail bond. Clause 495 of the Bill relates to procedure in case of insolvency of death of surety or when a bond is forfeited. Clause 496 of the Bill relates to bond required from minor. Clause 497 of the Bill relates to appeal from orders under section 446. Clause 498 of the Bill relates to power to direct levy of amount due on certain recognizances. Clause 499 of the Bill relates to order for custody and disposal of property pending trial in certain cases. Clause 500 of the Bill relates to order for disposal of property at conclusion of trial. Clause 501 of the Bill relates to payment to innocent purchaser of money found on accused. Clause 502 of the Bill relates to appeal against orders under section 500 or section 501. Clause 503 of the Bill relates to destruction of libellous and other matter. Clause 504 of the Bill relates to power to restore possession of immovable property. Clause 505 of the Bill relates to procedure by police upon seizure of property. Clause 506 of the Bill relates to procedure where no claimant appears within six months. Clause 507 of the Bill relates to power to sell perishable property. Clause 508 of the Bill relates to irregularities which do not vitiate proceedings. Clause 509 of the Bill relates to irregularities which vitiate proceedings. Clause 510 of the Bill relates to proceedings in wrong place. Clause 511 of the Bill relates to non-compliance with provisions of section 183 or section 316. Clause 512 of the Bill relates to effect of omission to frame, or absence of, or error in, charge. Clause 513 of the Bill relates to finding or sentence when reversible by reason of error, omission or irregularity. Clause 514 of the Bill relates to defect or error not to make attachment unlawful. Clause 515 of the Bill relates to definitions. Clause 516 of the Bill relates to bar to taking cognizance after lapse of the period of limitation. Clause 517 of the Bill relates to commencement of the period of limitation. Clause 518 of the Bill relates to exclusion of time in certain cases. Clause 519 of the Bill relates to exclusion of date on which Court is closed. Clause 520 of the Bill relates to continuing offence. This Clause provides that the case of a continuing offence, a fresh period of limitation shall begin to run at every moment of the time during which the offence continues. Clause 521 of the Bill relates to extension of period of limitation in certain cases. This Clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, any Court may take cognizance of an offence after the expiry of the period of limitation, if it is satisfied on the facts and in the circumstances of the case that the delay has been properly explained or that it is necessary so to do in the interests of justice. Clause 522 of the Bill relates to trials before High Courts. This Clause deals with an offence is tried by the High Court otherwise than under section 448, it shall, in the trial of the offence, observe the same procedure as a Court of Sessions would observe if it were trying the case. Clause 523 of the Bill relates to delivery to commanding officers of persons liable to be tried by Court-martial. Clause 524 of the Bill relates to forms. This Clause deals with subject to the power conferred by article 227 of the Constitution, the forms set forth in the Second Schedule, with such variations as the circumstances of each case require, may be used for the respective purposes therein mentioned, and if used shall be sufficient. Clause 525 of the Bill relates to power of High Court to make rules. Clause 526 of the Bill relates to power to alter functions allocated to Executive Magistrate in certain cases. Clause 527 of the Bill relates to case in which Judge or Magistrate is personally interested. Clause 528 of the Bill relates to practicing advocate not to sit as Magistrate in certain Courts. This Clause provides that no advocate who practices in the Court of any Magistrate shall sit as a Magistrate in that Court or in any Court within the local jurisdiction of that Court. Clause 529 of the Bill relates to public servant concerned in sale not to purchase or bid for property. This Clause provides that a public servant having any duty to perform in connection with the sale of any property under this Sanhita shall not purchase or bid for the property. Clause 530 of the Bill relates to saving of inherent powers of High Court. This Clause provides that nothing in this Sanhita shall be deemed to limit or affect the inherent powers of the High Court to make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to any order under this Sanhita, or to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. Clause 531 of the Bill relates to duty of High Court to exercise continuous superintendence over Courts. This Clause provides that every High Court shall so exercise its superintendence over the Courts of Sessions and Courts of Judicial Magistrates subordinate to it as to ensure that there is an expeditious and proper disposal of cases by the Judges and Magistrates. Clause 532 of the Bill relates to trial and proceedings to be held in electronic mode. This Clause provides that trials and proceedings under this Code, may be held in electronic mode, by use of electronic communication or use of audio-video electronic means. Clause 533 of the Bill relates to repeal and savings. This Clause provides that the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is repealed. FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bill, 2023, if enacted, is not likely to involve any expenditure, either recurring or non-recurring, from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India. MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION Sub-clause (a) of clause 2 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make rules inter alia to provide for other means of communication device for the purpose of video conferencing. Sub-clause (2) of clause 11 of the Bill empowers the High Court to make rules inter alia to provide for qualification and experience of any person to confer upon power of Judicial Magistrate in respect of a particular case or class of cases. Sub-clause (3) of clause 48 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make rules for the form to keep book of entry of arrested person. Sub-clause (2) of clause 153 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make rules to provide for the manner of notification of proclamation of order. Sub-clause (2) of clause 179 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make rules inter alia to provide for the payment of reasonable expenses to persons attending police officer. Sub-clause (3) of clause 320 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules inter alia to provide for Form for issuing Commission for taking evidence of witnesses in other country. Sub-clause (2) of clause 341 of the Bill empowers that the High Court may make rules inter alia for the mode of selecting advocate for defence; the facilities and the fee to be provided to such advocate by Government. Clause 350 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make rules to provide for reasonable expenses to witnesses for attending Court. Sub-clause (2) of clause of the Bill 369 empowers the State Government to make rules inter alia to provide for detention of accused in a mental Health establishment. Sub-clause (5) of clause 394 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make rules to carry out provisions of clause 394 relating to notification of residence and change thereof of released convicts. Sub-clause (2) of clause 462 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make rules inter alia to provide for the manner of execution of search warrant. Sub-clause (5) of clause 474 empowers the appropriate Government to make rules to provide for direction as to suspension of sentences and the conditions for presentation of petition. Clause 506 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make rules provide for the manner of dealing with proceeds of sale of property of non-claimant. Clause 523 of the Billempowers the Central Government to make rules inter alia to provide for the manner of trial of persons belonging to the armed forces of the union. Clause 525 of the Bill empowers the High Court to make rules for other matters. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made are matters of procedures and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. LOK SABHA ———— A BILL to consolidate and amend the law relating to Criminal Procedure. ———— (Shri Amit Shah, Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation) MGIPMRND—277LS(S3)—10-08-2023.